# AIM-7 Sparrow

![aim7](../../img/aim7.jpg)

Originally designated the AAM-N-6 Sparrow III, the AIM-7 Sparrow saw initial
service entry with the United States Navy in 1958. Unlike the beam-riding AIM-7A
(AAM-N-2 Sparrow I), which required the launching aircraft to maintain boresight
on the target for the flyout of the weapon, the semi-active radar homing AIM-7C
could effectively engage a maneuvering target well off boresight, so long as the
designating aircraft's radar could maintain a lock during the missile's
intercept. The AIM-7C quickly gave way to the 7D, which saw a number of kills
over Vietnam, and the 7E, which scored the majority of the type's kills in
Southeast Asia. Additionally, the F-4E saw compatibility with the AIM-7F and
AIM-7M.

Utilization of the AIM-7 begins with tuning the onboard rounds, performed with
the RDR MSL switch, selecting it into the CW ON position. This tuning process
takes approximately one minute, and can be initiated once power has been applied
for at least one minute to the radar (any position out of OFF) in most operating
environments (ambient temperature below 90 degrees F). The missiles are properly
tuned when the missile status light (RDR) is illuminate in each station carrying
a Sparrow missile for at least one minute. After successful tuning, the RDR MSL
switch can be returned to the STBY (Standby) position. The status lamps will
turn off once returned to STBY. Once in the combat area, the RDR MSL switch
should be returned to the CW ON position, to maintain proper missile kystron
tuning state during the engagement.

To employ an AIM-7, the Optical Sight should be placed into the A/A position,
which stabilizes the Reticle at the Radar Boresight Line in the window. The roll
tabs function to provide the pilot with relative roll attitude guidance in
instrument conditions (weather or nighttime), and the right side of the 50 mil
diameter circle (outer) functions as a range bar when a radar lock is achieved
against a target, displaying ranges up to 20,000' (top) to 3000' (bottom), with
12,000' signified at the 3 o-clock position.

When radar lock on against a target is achieved with AIM-7 selected, a pair of
strobes surround the locked target in azimuth. Identified as Rmax and Rmax 2,
they represent effective ranges against a 1 G target (Rmax), and a high rate
maneuvering target based on altitude (Rmax 2, representing 8G up to 20k, 6G to
35k, and 4G above 35,000'). When a missile is launched, the Rmax 2 strobe falls
to the bottom of the display, and begins driving upwards towards the target
lock; this functions as a missile flyout timer. When the timer reaches the
locked target, it can be assumed the missile has arrived. The display does not
provide Rmin, but instead reverts to a break X warning superimposed over the
radar image should Rmin be attained for a Sparrow launch.

Prior to engagement, a determination must be made as to whether or not the
missile interlocks will be kept in, or positioned out. The interlocks preclude
an AIM-7 shot when outside of effective firing parameters, those being the
missile in range (illuminating the IN RANGE light), the target aim dot within
the ASE (Allowable Steering Error) circle on the radar display, and the radar
display mode out of VI (Vis-Ident mode).

With the interlocks in, should any of the three aforementioned restrictions be
met- target out of range, aim dot outside the ASE, or the radar left in VI, a
trigger actuation will not cause the release of a missile. With interlocks out,
an AIM-7 will be released no matter the condition of the three interlocks.

When parameters are met, the the SHOOT lamps will illuminate. Found in both
cockpits, these lights reinforce the condition of good launch conditions for the
AIM-7. In the event a target enters a main beam clutter situation (aspect angle
between 81 and 99 degrees and lower than 5 degrees above the horizon), the
lights will turn off, even though the interlock requirements are met. Maneuver
should be utilized to bring the target outside this region prior to launch.

At the point of engagement, AIM-7 missiles are selected using the Pinky Switch
on the outboard (left) throttle arm, selecting the forward position. This
illuminates the RADAR lamp on the Head Up Display panel.

Before employing the AIM-7E Sparrow, a delay of four seconds should be given if
the Master Arm switch is set in the ON position prior to radar lock on, or a
delay of two seconds if the Master Arm switch is set to ON after radar lock on.
This is due to the set-in period of the missile speedgate. With the AIM-7F, this
delay is reduced to two seconds with Master Arm On prior to lock, or immediately
after selecting Master Arm to On if lock on was achieved first. Should these
delays not be adhered to, the missile may fail to track because of improper
target doppler injection.

With the target in parameters or interlocks out, pressing the trigger fires off
an AIM-7. A second AIM-7 can be fired immediately at the same target, if
desired, by releasing, then squeezing the trigger a second time- holding it on
the second actuation.


## Launch Sequence

![ext_launch_sequence_radar](../../img/ext_launch_seq_radar.png)

The launch sequence for the AIM-7 missile is

Left Forward Right Forward Left Rear Right Rear

In the event of a centerline store or tank precluding forward missile release,
the CL TK lamp will illuminate. Rear missiles may still be fired, and the
forward missiles may be fired if the a centerline tank is dropped or MER is
jettisoned. The lamp also illuminates in the event of a BRU-5/A in the
centerline position, however, a missile can be launched in that condition. The
Aero-27 precludes any release, even if the round has been dropped.

## Variants

The following variants of the AIM-7 family are available for this variant of the
Phantom:

| Variant | Description |
| ------- | ----------- |
| E       | TODO        |
| E-2     | TODO        |
| F       | TODO        |
| M       | TODO        |
