# Introduction

Dear Reader,

we are proud to present to you the Heatblur Simulations F-4E Phantom II for Digital Combat
Simulator. We’ve spent years of development and countless hours of research to bring you the most
in-depth recreation of this legendary aircraft ever made. You will be able to fly your Phantom both
as pilot and WSO, alone with the JESTER-AI - your own WSO AI - or in multiplayer together with a
friend. But not only did we recreate the Phantom’s flight model, systems, avionics, radar, RWR and
weapons delivery faithfully, we also tried to innovate our approach to flight simulation in general
with the module, laying important groundwork for our future modules and as always trying to push the
boundaries of flight simulation just a little bit further. From small quality of life improvements
like being able to write on your canopy, to an interactive crew chief, it also utilizes our next-gen
components based simulation framework - the aircraft is simulated as a connection of thousands of
individual components. From an instrument needle to control surfaces, each component influences the
state of the aircraft and even comes with its own wear and tear. From simulating accurate power draw
from the power source to the smallest light bulb and all the nodes along the way, from hydraulic
liquid which moves the hydraulics which in turn move the flight surfaces all the way to a mass
physics based model - things now happen naturally, influenced by each other, and not “scripted”
anymore. Whether that means that unstable power draw may cause a lamp to flicker, or that you can
deploy your landing gear in case of a failure using gravity, or that correct and incorrect use of
the aircraft influences the wear and tear of each single component individually - we never before
attempted a simulation as deep as with the F-4E Phantom II. The DCS: F-4 represents some of the most
immersive cold war fighter jet simulation available!

With such innovation and in depth simulation there comes of course an increased learning curve for
its users. This is why it was important for us to also innovate on the side of learning tools
available to you, starting with this manual, so that our modules are accessible to the casual simmer
and aficionado alike. You can open the manual in flight, and read along, but better still, you can
click any switch (with an input combo) in flight and the manual will open in the correct chapter,
explaining the switch or system in the cockpit, all while you are bolting through the air in your
thunderous jet. We also changed the underlying structure of the manual so that it can be open source
and the community can contribute easily via Github, as a thousand minds always think better than
one. It also improves readability for the mobile version. We hyperlinked many items for you to
provide easy connectivity between cockpit and systems overviews and included numerous checklists and
procedures, and on module EA release it will also feature a “Lessons” section. The fully written out
lessons will accompany your training missions. The training missions are now tailored to be learned
together with the written lesson in the manual, you will be able to revert steps in the training
mission, able to read along and pause (no more restarting for missed items), and also prepare
yourself accordingly before flying the mission. And best of all, your training will be instructed by
real life F-4 pilots and a real life F-4 WSO Instructor, who else could teach you better?

We hope you will both enjoy learning and flying the F-4E Phantom II - diving as deep as your heart
desires. For this exciting journey we wish you good luck and many fun adventures, and of course:
always check six!

In the name of the entire Heatblur Team,

Nicholas Dackard,
Heatblur Simulations, CEO and Founder
