# AGM-45 Shrike Anti-Radiation Missile

![agm45](../../../img/agm45.jpg)

The Sparrow-derived AGM-45 Shrike is an early attempt at an anti-radiation
missile for the suppression of enemy air defense (SEAD) role. Mating a
frequency-tuned seeker with the rocket body of an AIM-7, the Shrike provided the
United States Navy, and later the United States Air Force, with a standoff
option for the engagement of enemy SAM radars. While nominally effective, in
practice the Shrike was a difficult weapon to employ properly, given its limited
range, low speed, and primary engagement mode that left the launching aircraft
within lethal envelopes of most opposing air defense systems. Further reducing
its potency was a small warhead, meaning that in most instances only the
emitting antenna itself was damaged, rather than the vehicle it was mounted to.

While limited in most respects, the Shrike received a number of upgrades over
its lifetime, lasting in service from the mid-60s in Vietnam, until just after
the Gulf War, through better engines and additional seeker updates for later SAM
systems. The Shrike was put into use by two foreign users - the Israeli Air
Force, who also modified it for a ground-launched version, and through
clandestine means with the RAF during the Falklands War.

## Variants

Only the A variant can be equipped on this version of the Phantom.

## Employment

The AGM-45 has three separate launch modes available: AGM-45 (WRCS), LOFT, and
DIRECT.

### AGM-45 (WRCS Mode)

Used only with the AGM-45 in conjunction with the WRCS, this mode is the primary
means of employment of the Shrike. The mode is based around a high altitude
attack profile, and depends on the pre-programmed weapon engagement envelope of
the AGM-45 stored within the WRCS. This profile, in conjunction with current
aircraft state information from the INS and a signal provided by the receiver in
the missile - having detecting an emitter of the type its attuned to, define a
flight path and release envelope for optimum probability of the missile reaching
the target.

With the WRCS mode selected to AGM-45, the run is initiated by arming a station
select button for a hardpoint carrying an AGM-45 missile. Doing so activates the
missile's receiver, and upon emitter acquisition will provide the aforementioned
information signal to the WRCS. The WSO should enter a target altitude value
into the computer control panel, if necessary, using a mean value for the
current target area, and if multiple missiles are to be launched, a release
advance time setting. The WRCS receives both data from the missile regarding
look angle from the missile, along with corrected look angle from the INS; the
selection for which data to use is performed with the DF REJ switch, and should
in most all cases be left said position.

Look angle and estimated range available, the WRCS will provide guidance
instruction using the needles on the ADI. Once oriented in the dive angle, the
horizontal range to target will be provided on the HSI and BDHI, so long as the
INS position is selected for navigation mode.

When the aircraft's orientation is correct and the ADI needles are centered,
once the aircraft is within missile range, one of the indexer lights will
illuminate based on the detected range to target to instruct the pilot as to the
required release maneuver- dive, level, or pull-up. At this time, the pilot can
press and hold the bomb release button to initiate the attack. Once the release
range is attained in the instructed profile, the missile will be launched.

Special note must be made of the importance of maintaining the ADI needles
centered, especially the vertical azimuth relationship. Because the orientation
of the missile itself when installed on the wing can cause offset of its
receiver to occur when the aircraft is banked, preparation of the attack may
require repeated adjustments with wings brought to level every few seconds to
make certain the aircraft is pointing at the emitter.

#### Pull-up

The Pull-up instruction is guidance for the pilot to initiate a steady rotation
back to the horizon, and, if desired, continue into a steady climb state until
range requirements are met and the missile is launched. The pilot can choose to
either bring the aircraft to near level and stop, or pull further into a low
climb profile. When the aircraft is approximately 5 seconds away from release,
the level indicator will illuminate, directing the pilot to maintain the current
orientation until the Shrike is away.

#### Level

The level instruction is less of a directive than a confirmation of impending
launch. Depending on the initial attack setup, the level signal may immediately
occur, or occur quite soon after one of the other two instructions. From that
point, it is simply required that the pilot maintain the current state for best
chance of missile success.

#### Dive

The dive command in the WRCS mode occurs only when the attack is initiated very
close to the target. The situation and proximity to the SAM installation must be
considered prior to attack commitment with the pickle button, as any response by
the battery has a high probability of arriving before the missile can
potentially kill the emitter. The dive command, once followed, will then be
followed with the level indicator once missile launch imminent.

### Loft

The Loft attack profile of the Shrike is like a loft bombing attack, utilizing
the weapon lookup tables to define a suitable IP to release distance, the
necessary release angle, and the time from IP to pull-up is determined by the
lookup table speed versus the IP to release distance.

One key difference in the Loft mode versus the WRCS employment modes for the
Shrike is the primary usage of the NORM mode rather than DF REJ; this places the
missile's receiver in the role of the azimuth guidance directive on the ADI
rather than the INS. The ADI's vertical needle will appear when the AGM-45
position is selected on the pedestal switch.

The attack is performed like a loft bombing profile; the Phantom is flown over
the IP at the intended altitude and airspeed, with the bomb release button being
held from the point of flyover. The countdown timer initiates, the horizontal
ADI bar appears to maintain level flight, and the pull-up lamp illuminates. When
the pull-up timer runs out, the pull-up lamp will turn off, the sight reticle will
turn off, and the horizontal ADI bar will move to display G load as normal for
the pull-up maneuver; a correct profile will keep both ADI bars centered. When
the aircraft achieves the programmed release angle, the missile will launch.
Once launch has occurred, the pull-up lamp and sight reticle will illuminate
again, and the horizontal ADI bar will stow.

### Direct Mode

Direct mode employment of the AGM-45 is dependent on the crew knowing the
precise location of the target SAM emitter; while it can be utilized as a
fallback method in event of a WRCS system failure, the need for at least 10
degrees of dive angle against the targe for successful delivery places a premium
on being able to plan the attack against a specific point on the ground.

To employ the weapon in Direct mode, the crew confirms receipt of emitter audio,
and initiates a dive to center the ADI needles at the target. The crew should
then check the dive chart for angle and AGL, and the pilot should maneuver into
that orientation, maintaining a centered vertical ADI needle. From that point,
the bomb release button is pressed and held until the Shrike is fired.
