# Right Main Panel

![RMP](../../img/RMP.png)

## RWR Azimuth Indicator

![RWRAz](../../img/RWRAz.png)

## Azimuth-Elevation Indicator

![EOLos](../../img/EOLos.png)

The Azimuth-Elevation Indicator, or also Line-Of-Sight Indicator, is the main
instrument for the pilot to assess the current attitude of the Pave Spike
Targeting Pod in order to keep the line of sight within the operational limits.

The needle shows the pods roll position from -160° (CW) to +110° (CCW).

Three flags indicate the elevation:

- green: -120° to -155°
- yellow: -155° to -160°
- red: -160° or beyond

If the needle is kept within the green labelled range and neither the yellow or
red flag are shown, the view will not be obstructed by the pod or the aircraft.

## Master Caution Light

![MCLP](../../img/pilot_master_caution.png)

The Master Caution light illuminates to provide the pilot warning of a condition
requiring attention, directing them to look at the telelight panel for
additional information. The Master Caution lamp is reset by correcting the
condition, or pressing the Master Caution Reset button on the generator control
panel.

## Fire Test Button

![FTB](../../img/pilot_fire_test_button.png)

When pressed, this button tests for functionality of the FIRE and OVRHT lamps.
Under normal conditions, all four lights should light up as long as the button
is pressed down. If a lamp does not light up, it is likely broken and cannot be
trusted on indicating a fire condition anymore.

The button can also be used in conjunction with the Warning Lights Test switch
to confirm detection and continuity performance of the fire and overheat warning
systems.

Holding the Warning Lights Test switch in the WARN TEST position, then
simultaneously pressing and releasing the Fire Test Button performs the test.
Proper system function is confirmed with the four FIRE and OVRHT lamps off while
the Fire Test Button is pressed, then illuminating when it is released.

## Fire/Overheat Warning Lamps

![FOWL](../../img/pilot_fire_overheat.png)

The Fire and Overheat Warning Lamps, one for each engine, are a pair of
two-position indicators that illuminate when a fire condition is detected in the
engine compartment (FIRE), or an overheat condition is detected in the exhaust
nozzle section (OVRHT).

## Fuel Quantity Indicator

![JPInd](../../img/JPInd.png)

The Fuel Quantity Indicator provides two different indications of total usable
internal fuel to confirm proper transfer function between the seven internal
fuel cells, as well as any external loaded tanks. The upper hemisphere's sector
display presents fuel quantity detected in fuselage cells 1 through 6, excluding
the aft-most cell 7, as well as the internal wing tanks. The sector display
presents 200 lb increments from 0 to 3000 pounds, and 500 pound increments for
the rest of the gauge. The lower tape counter readout includes all internal
fuel, including cell 7 and the internal wing tanks, and is presented in 100 lb
increments.

## Fuel Flow Gauges

![FFI](../../img/FFI.png)

A pair of fuel flow indicators is provided, one for each engine, presenting
pounds per hour rate from 0 to 12, in 1000 lb increments. Flow indications are
for basic, non-afterburning thrust. In afterburner, the flow rate is roughly
four times the displayed flow rate.

## Tachometers

![Tach](../../img/Tach.png)

A percentage-noting Tachometer is provided for each engine, including an inset
wheel for accurate display of single digits.

## Exhaust Gas Temperature Gauges

![EGT](../../img/EGT.png)

Exhuast Gas Temperature gauges are provided for each engine. The gauges have two
needles- a large needle providing increments of 0 to 12 in multiples of 100
degrees centigrade, and a smaller needle presenting increments of 0-10 in
multiples of 10 degrees centigrade. Temperatures are measured at the exit of the
turbine unit.

## Dual Exhaust Nozzle Position Indicators

![NPI](../../img/NPI.png)

A combined Nozzle Position Indicator is provided with two needles, one for each
engine on their respective side, to confirm balanced nozzle position and
scheduling relative to throttle position. The gauge provides four zones relative
to the nozzles being in their fully open configuration, or their maximum closed
configuration at the bottom. At idle, the indication will be roughly 7/8ths
open, and schedules down as throttle is increased. Position in the afterburner
region will moderate to maintain safe EGT levels.
