# Bombs

In the arsenal of the F-4E Phantom II, the role of bombs is pivotal, representing a commitment to
precision and impact in ground attack missions. As a multirole fighter aircraft, the Phantom II is
equipped with a versatile array of bombs that cater to a diverse range of operational scenarios.
This section explores the various bomb types carried by the F-4E, showcasing the aircraft's
capability to deliver effective and targeted strikes against ground-based adversaries.

## MK-80 Series: Tradition meets Precision

At the core of the F-4E's bomb armament is the Mark 80 series, a family of general-purpose bombs
that includes the MK-82, MK-83, and MK-84. These unguided bombs have been mainstays in military
aviation for decades, offering a balance of destructive power and simplicity. When equipped with
guidance kits, such as the Joint Direct Attack Munition (JDAM), the Mark 80 series transforms into
precision-guided munitions, allowing for surgical strikes on high-value targets with reduced
collateral damage.

## Cluster Munitions: Maximizing Impact

For missions requiring widespread target coverage, the F-4E Phantom II can be configured to carry
cluster bombs. These munitions disperse smaller bomblets over a designated area, effectively
saturating the target zone. The versatility of cluster bombs allows the Phantom II to engage
multiple targets in a single pass, making them valuable assets in scenarios where efficiency and
coverage are paramount.

## Laser-guided Bombs: Surgical Precision

In pursuit of unparalleled precision, the F-4E can be armed with laser-guided bombs (LGBs), such as
the Paveway series. These munitions leverage laser guidance systems to home in on designated targets
with exceptional accuracy. The integration of LGBs enhances the Phantom II's ability to conduct
surgical strikes on specific points of interest, minimizing collateral damage and maximizing the
effectiveness of each mission.

## TV-Guided Munitions: A new Era

The GBU-8 HOBOS, developed by Hughes Aircraft Company, represented a paradigm shift in the Phantom
II's ground attack capabilities. Deploying optical sensors and a television camera, this TV-guided
bomb allowed F-4E pilots to transcend the constraints of traditional bombing, enabling them to guide
the munition accurately to its target in real-time. The revolutionary aspect lay not just in
precision but in the ability to engage targets beyond the pilot's line of sight, redefining the
dynamics of ground attack missions.

The AGM-62 Walleye series provided the F-4E Phantom II with a newfound level of operational
flexibility. Pilots could engage a diverse array of ground targets, including enemy bunkers, armored
vehicles, and critical infrastructure, all with the assurance of real-time guidance. The
adaptability of the Walleye I and II allowed the Phantom II to navigate complex and dynamic
battlefield scenarios, making it a versatile asset in both conventional and asymmetric warfare.
