# Engines

The F-4E Phantom is powered by two J79-GE-17 engines built by General Electric,
with a rated static sea-level power delivery of 11,870 pounds of thrust in Mil,
and 17,900 pounds in afterburner. The engines have provision for both assisted
pneumatic start at fields with an available cart, or via a propellant cartridge
to initiate spin-up. Similarly, the engines can utilize the aircraft's internal
battery for initial power, or connection with an external power cart.

## Fuel Flow Indicators

![FFI](../../img/FFI.jpg)

Each engine has a fuel flow indicator found in the front cockpit instrument
panel. The indicators read in thousands of pounds per hour, from 0 to 12. The
indicators provide flow rate up to Mil power; when afterburner is engaged, a
separate fuel delivery system is used to provide fuel directly to the
afterburner stage, and the flow rate is approximately 4 times the value shown.

## Oil Pressure Indicators

![OilPress](../../img/OilPress.jpg)

Oil pressure indicators are on the front cockpit pedestal panel, and are
graduated from 0 to 10, and are presented in 10 lb increments.

## Variable Duct Ramp

Optimization of air to the engines is performed by a Variable Duct Ramp system
directed by the ADC; this optimization uses a pair of variable ramps to
decelerate incoming air to subsonic for best engine performance. In the event
limits are exceeded for inlet temperature, the Duct Temperature High Indicator
Light (DUCT TEMP HI) on the telelight panel will illuminate. Permitting the
issue to continue can cause permanent engine damage.

## Starting System

### Pneumatic Mode Starting

![ext_cart](../../img/ext_ground_cart.jpg)

The normal mode for starting the Phantom utilizes an auxiliary start cart that
turns the starter turbine, cranking the engine over.

### Cartridge Mode Starting

![f_4_cartridge_start](../../img/f_4_cartridge_start.jpg)

Cartridge mode is supplied for operational and emergency needs. A propellant
charge is used to turn the starter turbine, which in turn cranks the engine over
to initiate startup.

### Start Switch

![StartSwitch](../../img/pilot_start_switch.jpg)

Used only for cartridge start, selecting L or R ignites the cartridge set for
the respective engine.

### Ignition System

![IgnitionButtons](../../img/pilot_ignition_system.jpg)

Engine ignition for startup is performed using a pair of spark plugs on each
engine, activated by pressing the red Ignition Button found on the rear of both
throttle levers. The button is depressed as part of the starting sequence to
ignite the spark plugs, initiating combustion in chambers four and five of the
engines.

### Engine Anti-Icing System

![EngineDeIcing](../../img/pilot_engine_de_ice.jpg)

Using the Anti-Icing Switch set to DE-ICE, bleed air from stage 17 is
distributed to ports installed in the compressor face area of the engines. This
system does not perform de-icing functions, but is to be activated prior to ice
formation. As high Mach speeds provide enough friction heat to the air stream to
deny icing in the compressor stage, usage of the Anti-Icing System is
unnecessary and can cause engine damage.

### Anti-Ice Indicator Lights

![pilot_anti_ice_indicator_lights](../../img/pilot_anti_ice_indicators.jpg)

Activation of the Anti-Icing system will illuminate two lights on the telelight
panel, L ANTI-ICE On and R ANTI-ICE On. A failure of the anti-icing system with
the Anti-Icing Switch set to NORMAL will also light these telelight indicators
as a warning. If the aircraft is above Mach 1.2 when this occurs, immediate
speed reduction is necessary to prevent engine loss. Because of the warning
function for the ANTI-ICE ON lamps, a condition that illuminates them will
provide a MASTER CAUTION warning.

## Controls and Indicators

### Exhaust Nozzle Position Indicators

![NPI](../../img/NPI.jpg)

Directed by the Exhaust Nozzle Control Unit, the paired primary (the convergent,
inner nozzle) and secondary (the divergent, outer nozzle) are actuated
independently on a schedule to maximize outlet performance versus exhaust gas
temperature. When idle, the engine nozzle will be roughly 7/8ths open, reducing
in size as the throttle approaches MIL. During operation in the MIL and AB
regions, the Control Unit moderates the nozzle size relative to throttle
position and received EGT to maintain temperatures within design limit.

To monitor the current position of the nozzles relative to each other, as well
as EGTs, an indicator is provided with calibrations from CLOSE to OPEN in four
increments.

### Engine Master Switches

![EngineMasterSwitches](../../img/pilot_engine_master_switches.jpg)

A pair of two-position Engine Master Switches are found on the front cockpit
left console on the inboard engine control panel. Selecting ON powers the fuel
boost and transfer pumps for the respective engine; this will occur whether the
aircraft is connected to external auxiliary power or not, as doing so without
will connect the aircraft battery to the pump circuits.

As the Engine Master Switches arm the fuel shutoff valves, to properly shut down
the engines without external power it is necessary to return the throttles to
the cutoff position prior to turning the Engine Master Switches off, otherwise
the valves will remain open.

### Throttles

![Throttles](../../img/pilot_throttles.jpg)

Paired throttles are provided in both cockpits for engine thrust control. In
normal use, movement of the throttles from IDLE to OFF will perform fuel cutoff;
to prevent inadvertent engine shutdown, a pair of finger lifts are provided to
lock out the OFF position without performing this actuation. Afterburner is
attained by shifting the throttles outboard (left) at the MIL stop, then pushing
them forward.

The rear cockpit throttles are connected to the front throttles in such a
fashion that only the pilot can start the engines or enter the afterburner
range; the WSO can reduce throttle out of the afterburner region back into MIL
operation and lower. While the rear throttles can be shifted from OFF without
pilot assistance, return to OFF for shutdown requires pilot engagement of the
finger lifts.

In the event of opposing commands on the throttle arms between seats, the rear
throttles will be disconnected from the front throttles to prevent damage to the
linkage. This condition may cause a reduction in afterburner authority from the
front throttle pair. Resetting the throttle linkage is performed by placing the
front throttles at the IDLE or MIL stop and moving the rear throttles in the
opposite direction to which the disconnect occurred.

The rear throttles only hold a microphone button and speed brake switch.

### Tachometers

![Tach](../../img/Tach.jpg)

Both engines are provided with tachometers on the right side of the front
cockpit instrument panel, and the right side of the rear cockpit instrument
panel. The tachometers will function without external power.

### Exhaust Gas Temperature Indicators

![EGT](../../img/EGT.jpg)

Exhaust Gas Temperature Indicators are found on the front cockpit instrument
panel. The indicators have two pointers each: a large pointer for the 0 to 12
scale referencing 100 degrees centigrade, and a smaller pointer on a separate
scale with 0 to 10 referencing 10 degrees centigrade. Measuring for these values
is performed upon exit of the turbine.
