# Flight Controls

![ext_view_flight_controls](../../img/ext_flight_controls.jpg)

## Control Sticks

![FlightStick](../../img/pilot_control_stick.jpg)

A control stick is provided in both cockpits, with near-uniform switchology
between the two. A Trim Control is found on both sticks to provide force
reduction and minor flight path correction in the pitch and roll axis. Weapons
are deliverable through both a Trigger (for air-to-air missiles and the gun) and
a Bomb Release Switch. Both sticks carry a Nose Gear Steering Switch that
doubles as a radar auto-acquisition control for the radar in visual range
combat, and sensor focus control for video-directed air to ground weapons. An
Emergency Quick Release lever on each stick is available to immediately
deactivate the anti-skid, ARI, autopilot, and stability augmentation. Unique to
the front cockpit control stick is the Air Refueling Release Button- a dual-role
control that performs the boom disconnect function its name implies, as well as
a number of weapon selection functions.

Also unique to the front cockpit stick is a force transducer, to allow the pilot
fine adjustment control of the AFCS with the autopilot functionality engaged. In
the event the force applied to the stick exceeds the AFCS breakout limit,
autopilot will be turned off.

## Aileron-Spoiler Control and Stabilator Control Feel and Trim Systems

The Aileron-Spoiler Control System and the Stabilator Control System both offer
trim following; the former through a screw jack actuator, the latter using a
servo directed by the AFCS. These functions cause the stick to position relative
to the current trim and autopilot position when the crew member in control goes
"hands off". It is therefore advisable to maneuver the stick to the same
position, or to gently move the stick to "breakout force" prior to disengaging
the autopilot system to reduce the chance for an abrupt return to pilot control.

To confirm current state of the stabilator trim, a Stabilator Trim Position
Indicator is provided on the front cockpit left vertical panel.

![StabTrimInd](../../img/StabTrimInd.jpg)

## Rudder Control System

![ext_rudder](../../img/ext_flight_controls_rudder.jpg)

Yaw axis control is directed by the rudder pedals found in both cockpits. To
offset any relative skidding due to wind effect, stores imbalance, or minor
engine output deviation, a Rudder Trim Switch is found on the engine control
panel in the front cockpit. On the ground, the pedals themselves can be pressed
independently for differential braking, and the rudder axis itself functions as
the nose wheel steering directional control when the nose wheel steering button
on either control stick is pressed.

## Aileron-Rudder Interconnect (ARI)

![ARIfuse](../../img/ARIfuse.jpg)

To assist in low speed turn coordination, the Phantom II includes an
Aileron-Rudder Interconnect. The system is engaged automatically with the Slats
Flap Switch in the Out and Down position, and below the flap blowup speed of 230
knots. With the system engaged, the rudder can be driven up to 10 degrees by the
interconnect to alleviate pilot workload. In the event either seat in command
requires the ARI deactivated, the system can be disconnected by pulling the
Emergency Quick Release switch on their respective control stick. Releasing the
switch will re-engage the ARI. Function of the ARI can always be overridden
through the rudder pedals.

## Stability Augmentation System

![pilot_stability_switches](../../img/pilot_stability_augmentation_switches.jpg)

The F-4 offers a three axis Stability Augmentation system, with independent
Pitch, Roll, and Yaw channels. The system is to smooth out flight in normal
cruise regimes, rather than provide enhancement in maneuvering. The control
panel for the Stab Aug system is found in the front cockpit.

The Pitch channel provides a maximum control authority to the stability
augmentation of one half degree (0.5) above or below the current pitch trim
setting.

The Roll channel gives the stability augmentation 7.5 degrees of control of the
ailerons, and up to 11 degrees of deflection to the spoilers.

The Yaw channel permits augmentation up to 5 degrees left or right from the
current rudder trim position.

Because the stability augmentation system can misinterpret roll oscillation in
high AoA maneuvering and inadvertently invoke adverse roll, it is suggested to
disable the Roll channel prior to aerobatics or combat to alleviate this
possibility.

With the Roll stability augmentation system engaged, roll rate using the rear
control stick can be less than that in the front cockpit relative to the amount
of deflection; conversely, when returning control to the front cockpit, the rate
can jump due to said difference.

## Slats Flap System

![ext_slats_and_flaps](../../img/ext_slats_and_flaps.jpg)

The Slats Flap system is manually selected for takeoff and landing, then
automatically controlled relative to AoA for best handling performance in all
other flight regimes. Control is through a three position switch found outboard
of the left throttle handle in the front cockpit and driven by the aircraft
hydraulic system. The three switch positions are Norm, Out, and Out and Down,
and the resulting command can be moderated based on whether or not the landing
gear being deployed.

![SlatsRelative](../../img/SlatsRelative.jpg)

Norm is the standard in-flight position, locking the Flaps and automatically
programming the Slat deployment as a function of AoA.

Out deploys the Slats to their fully deployed position. Should the landing gear
be deployed, both the Slats and Flaps will deploy.

Out and Down fully deploys both the Slats and the Flaps. Should the landing gear
not be down, the Wheels Light on the telelight Panel will illuminate and flash.

Both cockpits have a Slats Flap Indicator, which read In and Out, along with a
barber-pole reading when the surfaces are in transition.

![SltFlpInd](../../img/SltFlpInd.jpg)

In the Norm position, Maneuvering Slat deployment is a function of AoA; above
11.5 units they will extend, then retract when the aircraft is reduced below
10.5 units. Maneuvering Slat operation includes a speed-induced blowback; slats
will retract due to air pressure between 568 and 602 knots.

![Slats Override](../../img/SlatsOvrd.jpg)

To the rear of the Fuel Control Panel in the front cockpit is the Slat Override Switch. Guarded,
this switch has two positions: NORM and IN. Defaulted to NORM under the guard, switching to IN
forces the retraction of the slats, no matter the current aircraft AoA or state of the Slats Flap
Switch position; this action will trigger the SLATS IN warning on the telelight Panel and illuminate
the Master Caution.

The Slats Flaps system also has an Emergency system; handles are found on the
Slats Flaps control panel in the front cockpit, and next to the rear cockpit
throttle pair. The emergency system uses pneumatic pressure, and does not
require electrical power to force deployment. The emergency system can only
function once, and can be actuated at any airspeed; however, above 230 knots,
the Flaps will retract based on air pressure, and the normal Slat retraction
speeds also apply.

## Speed Brakes

![ext_speed_brakes_out](../../img/ext_speed_brakes.jpg)

Underneath the aircraft and close to the rear Sparrow recesses are the speed
brakes, installed on the wings. The speed brakes are driven by the aircraft's
hydraulic system and actuated by a three position switch found on the inboard
throttle in both cockpits. Either switch will actuate the brakes. The positions
are Out, Stop, and In; the first and last positions are momentary (reverting to
Stop upon being released).

![pilot_speed_brake](../../img/pilot_air_brake.jpg)

Brake actuation illuminates the Speed Brake Out Indicator Light found on the
Telelight Panel. Brake deployment and illumination of the Indicator does not
trigger the Master Caution.

![SpeedBrakeLight](../../img/pilot_speedbrake_out.jpg)

## Angle of Attack System

![ext_aoa_diagram](../../img/ext_aoa_diagram.jpg)

To precisely monitor and control aircraft flight performance, the Angle of
Attack System (AoA) provides visual and audio confirmation of current
parameters. Included in the system are the Angle of Attack Indicators found in
both cockpits, the illuminated Angle of Attack Indexers, as well as the AoA
Aural Tone System.

### Indicators

![AoAInd](../../img/AoAInd.jpg)

The Angle of Attack Indicator dials register AoA values from 0 to 30 units, with
indications for weight-relative optimum altitude cruise (7.9 units) , approach
(19.2 units), and stall (30 units). A matrix can be found in the appendices to
calculate optimum cruise altitude by gross weight.

It is important to note that extension of the landing gear and thus the nose
gear door changes the airflow around the probe causing to indicate higher
angles by 1 unit. The approach airspeeds account for that. Therefore, performing
an approach with the gear retracted, will cause the indicators to show
approximately 1 unit low, and the aircraft will be roughly 5 knots fast for an
on-speed approach.

### Indexers

![AoA](../../img/AoA.jpg)

The AoA Indexers, found on the windshield frame of the front cockpit, and above
the instrument panel in the rear, display color coded and directional symbology
for the on-speed approach value of 19.2 units once the landing gear have been
lowered.

## Aural Tone System

![manual_aural_tone_landing](../../img/manual_aural_tone_landing.jpg)

![manual_aural_tone_in_flight](../../img/manual_aural_tone_in_flight.jpg)

The Aural Tone System provides audible feedback in maneuvering flight and during
landing configuration. Beginning above 15 units AoA with gear down, and 21 units
AoA with the gear up and slats in, a pulse will be heard by both crew-members.

The rate of the pulse can vary from 1.5 to 20 pulses per second, with increasing
frequency based on higher AoA values.

This tone can be lowered in volume below 20.3 units AoA gear down/25 units gear
up with controls in each cockpit; exceeding these values will cause the system
to override the volume limits and deliver the warning pulses at full volume.

The respective knobs are labelled STALL WARNING and can be found on the right
side in either cockpit. They must not to be confused with the AURAL TONE CONTROL
knobs, which control weapon related tones.

## Stall Warning Vibrator

The left front cockpit pedal includes a Stall Warning Vibrator, which is
activated over 22.3 units Angle of Attack. This physical (and in DCS audible)
indication is given to make the pilot aware of the potential of an impending
stall and provide enough time to reduce AoA and prevent the loss of control of
the aircraft. Reducing AoA below the threshold will deactivate the warning.
