# Flight Control System

Get ready for an exploration of the remarkable flight control systems that have earned the F-4E
Phantom II its stellar reputation among pilots and ground crews. From the phantastic intricacies of
electrics, hydraulics, pneumatics to the finely-tuned fuel system, this chapter is your gateway to
mastering the essentials needed to navigate this lead sled with finesse and expertise!

## Turning a light on: The electrical system

The F-4E Phantom II's aircraft electrical power supply system comprises two engine-driven AC
generators, two dc-transformer-rectifiers, a nickel-cadmium battery, and a power distribution (bus)
system. For a detailed visual representation and information about the electrical system's schematic
and circuit breakers, reference the foldout illustration provided in the documentation. This system
ensures a reliable and diverse power source for the aircraft's various electrical components and
systems.

## Power for the double Ugly: The engines

The F-4E Phantom II is equipped with two General Electric J79-GE-17A/F engines featuring modulated
afterburners. A turbine-type starter, powered by external air or the expanding gases of a solid
propellant cartridge, is employed for engine cranking during starting. Electrical power for the
starting process is supplied by either the aircraft battery or an external electrical power source.
Bleed air from the 17th stage of the compressor serves various functions, such as cockpit air
conditioning, pressurization, equipment air conditioning, air data computer, engine anti-icing, fuel
tank pressurization, pneumatic system air compressor, and windshield rain removal. This
configuration with J79-GE-17A/F engines underscores the Phantom II's versatility and adaptability in
diverse operational scenarios.

## Make it move: The Flight controls

The primary flight controls of the aircraft include the stabilator, rudder, ailerons, and spoilers,
with artificial feel systems simulating aerodynamic forces for the control stick and rudder pedals.
Secondary controls consist of slats, flaps, and speed brakes. Stability augmentation is achieved
individually or in combination for pitch, roll, or yaw by engaging the PITCH, ROLL, and/or YAW stab
aug switches. The system reduces oscillations and lateral forces, enhancing overall stability. The
slats and flaps system is integrated, providing automatic slat configuration for in-flight maneuvers
and selective slat-flap configuration for takeoff and landing. Hydraulic actuation is employed, and
an emergency pneumatic system can extend flaps and slats if the normal system fails. Flap and/or
slat chatter, identified by machine-gun-like sounds and pressure fluctuations, may occur, with
emergency measures in place to prevent structural damage if they are inadvertently left extended
beyond their limits.

## Feeding the bird's heart: The Fuel system

The F-4E Phantom II features an internal fuel system comprising interconnected cells in the fuselage
and two internal wing tanks. External fuel is carried in two wing-mounted 370-gallon tanks and a
600-gallon fuselage-mounted tank. Refueling can occur on the ground through a single pressure
refueling point or airborne through the air refueling receptacle. Fuselage cells, arranged
sequentially, include a self-sealing feature on later aircraft. Flapper valves in cells 1, 2, and 4
prevent reverse flow during climbs. Hydraulic and electric pumps transfer fuel between cells, and
engine bleed air pressure facilitates fuel transfer. Fuel quantity is measured in pounds using
capacitance-type fuel gaging units in fuselage cells and internal wing tanks. External wing tanks
vent to internal wing tank dump lines, while other tanks vent to the fuel vent mast below the
rudder. In the event of a complete transfer pump failure, cells 2 through 7 can gravity flow into
cell 1, with usable fuel depending on flight attitude and acceleration. Flight configurations, such
as emergency approaches, can impact the availability of fuselage fuel during gravity feed.

## Get back safe: The gear and ground handling

The F-4 Phantom features a tricycle landing gear system driven by the Utility hydraulic system. In
case of Utility hydraulics failure, an emergency extension system using compressed air is available
for landing gear deployment. Nose Gear Steering is controlled through a button on the control stick
in either cockpit, allowing the crew member to steer using the rudder pedals while holding the
button. The nose gear has a steering limit of 70 degrees in both directions. Additionally, the F-4E
is equipped with a Drag Chute to reduce landing roll and aid in spin recovery. Deployment is
initiated by rotating a handle in the front cockpit, and once the chute has served its purpose, it
can be jettisoned by pressing a button and pulling the handle back. This action releases the chute
cables, allowing it to pull free.

## The blood of the Rhino: The hydraulic system

The F-4 Phantom is equipped with three independent closed-center hydraulic systems: Power Control
System One (PC-1), Power Control System Two (PC-2), and Utility System. Operating at approximately
3000 psi, these systems are pressurized whenever the engines are running. The power control systems
supply hydraulic pressure to ailerons, spoilers, and stabilator dual power control cylinders, while
the utility system supplies pressure to all systems except the stabilator actuator. Aircraft 68-452
and later have a stabilator auxiliary power unit (APU), an electrically operated self-contained unit
with an operating pressure of approximately 1700 psi. Hydraulic pumps mounted on each engine
pressurize the PC-1 and PC-2 systems, with the left engine supplying pressure to one side of the
left aileron, left spoiler, and stabilator, and the right engine supplying pressure to one side of
the right aileron, right spoiler, and stabilator. The utility system provides pressure to the
remaining side of aileron and spoiler dual power control cylinders. The independence of these
systems ensures redundancy, with each aileron and spoiler having two independent sources of
hydraulic pressure, allowing one system to function as a backup for the other. Refer to the foldout
illustration for a detailed schematic of the hydraulic system.
