# General Design and Systems Overview

## Flight Control Systems

### Engines

The F-4E Phantom is powered by two J79-GE-17 engines built by General Electric,
with a rated static sea-level power delivery of 11,870 pounds of thrust in Mil,
and 17,900 pounds in afterburner. The engines have provision for both assisted
pneumatic start at fields with an available cart, or via a propellant cartridge
to initiate spinup. Similarly, the engines can utilize the aircraft's internal
battery for initial power, or connection with an external power cart.

#### Fuel Flow Indicators

![FFI](img/FFI.png)

Each engine has a fuel flow indicator found in the front cockpit instrument
panel. The indicators read in thousands of pounds per hour, from 0 to 12. The
indicators provide flow rate up to Mil power; when afterburner is engaged, a
separate fuel delivery system is used to provide fuel directly to the
afterburner stage, and the flow rate is approximately 4 times the value shown.

#### Oil Pressure Indicators

![OilPress](img/OilPress.png)

Oil pressure indicators are on the front cockpit pedestal panel, and are
graduated from 0 to 10, and are presented in 10 lb increments.

#### Variable Duct Ramp

Optimization of air to the engines is performed by a Variable Duct Ramp system
directed by the ADC; this optimization uses a pair of variable ramps to
decelerate incoming air to subsonic for best engine performance. In the event
limits are exceeded for inlet temperature, the Duct Temperature High Indicator
Light (DUCT TEMP HI) on the telelight panel will illuminate. Permitting the
issue to continue can cause permanent engine damage.

### Engine Starting System

#### Pneumatic Mode Starting

The normal mode for starting the Phantom utilizes an auxiliary start cart that
turns the starter turbine, cranking the engine over.

#### Cartridge Mode Starting

Cartridge mode is supplied for operational and emergency needs. A propellant
charge is used to turn the starter turbine, which in turn cranks the engine over
to initiate startup.

#### Start Switch

Used only for cartridge start, selecting L or R ignites the cartridge set for
the respective engine.

#### Engine Ignition System

Engine ignition for startup is performed using a pair of spark plugs on each
engine, activated by pressing the Ignition Button found to the front of both
throttle levers. The button is depressed as part of the starting sequence to
ignite the spark plugs, initiating combustion in chambers four and five of the
engines.

#### Engine Anti-Icing System

Using the Anti-Icing Switch set to DE-ICE, bleed air from stage 17 is
distributed to ports installed in the compressor face area of the engines. This
system does not perform de-icing functions, but is to be activated prior to ice
formation. As high Mach speeds provide enough friction heat to the air stream to
deny icing in the compressor stage, usage of the Anti-Icing System is
unnecessary and can cause engine damage.

#### Anti-Ice Indicator Lights

Activation of the Anti-Icing system will illuminate two lights on the telelight
panel, L ANTI-ICE On and R ANTI-ICE On. A failure of the anti-icing system with
the Anti-Icing Switch set to NORMAL will also light these telelight indicators
as a warning. If the aircraft is above Mach 1.2 when this occurs, immediate
speed reduction is necessary to prevent engine loss. Because of the warning
function for the ANTI-ICE ON lamps, a condition that illuminates them will
provide a MASTER CAUTION warning.

### Engine Controls and Indicators

#### Exhaust Nozzle Position Indicators

![NPI](img/NPI.png)

Directed by the Exhaust Nozzle Control Unit, the paired primary (the convergent,
inner nozzle) and secondary (the divergent, outer nozzle) are actuated
independently on a schedule to maximize outlet performance versus exhaust gas
temperature. When idle, the engine nozzle will be roughly 7/8ths open, reducing
in size as the throttle approaches MIL. During operation in the MIL and AB
regions, the Control Unit moderates the nozzle size relative to throttle
position and received EGT to maintain temperatures within design limit.

To monitor the current position of the nozzles relative to each other, as well
as EGTs, an indicator is provided with calibrations from CLOSE to OPEN in four
increments.

#### Engine Master Switches

A pair of two-position Engine Master Switches are found on the front cockpit
left console on the inboard engine control panel. Selecting ON powers the fuel
boost and transfer pumps for the respective engine; this will occur whether the
aircraft is connected to external auxiliary power or not, as doing so without
will connect the aircraft battery to the pump circuits.

As the Engine Master Switches arm the fuel shutoff valves, to properly shut down
the engines without external power it is necessary to return the throttles to
the cutoff position prior to turning the Engine Master Switches off, otherwise
the valves will remain open.

#### Throttles

Paired throttles are provided in both cockpits for engine thrust control. In
normal use, movement of the throttles from IDLE to OFF will perform fuel cutoff;
to prevent inadvertent engine shutdown, a pair of finger lifts are provided to
lock out the OFF position without performing this actuation. Afterburner is
attained by shifting the throttles outboard (left) at the MIL stop, then pushing
them forward.

The rear cockpit throttles are connected to the front throttles in such a
fashion that only the pilot can start the engines or enter the afterburner
range; the WSO can reduce throttle out of the afterburner region back into MIL
operation and lower. While the rear throttles can be shifted from OFF without
pilot assistance, return to OFF for shutdown requires pilot engagement of the
finger lifts.

In the event of opposing commands on the throttle arms between seats, the rear
throttles will be disconnected from the front throttles to prevent damage to the
linkage. This condition may cause reduction in afterburner authority from the
front throttle pair. Resetting the throttle linkage is performed by placing the
front throttles at the IDLE or MIL stop and moving the rear throttles in the
opposite direction to which the disconnect occurred.

The rear throttles only hold a microphone button and speed brake switch.

#### Tachometers

![Tach](img/Tach.png)

Both engines are provided with tachometers on the right side of the front
cockpit instrument panel, and the right side of the rear cockpit instrument
panel. The tachometers will function without external power.

#### Exhaust Gas Temperature Indicators

![EGT](img/EGT.png)

Exhaust Gas Temperature Indicators are found on the front cockpit instrument
panel. The indicators have two pointers each: a large pointer for the 0 to 12
scale referencing 100 degrees centigrade, and a smaller pointer on a separate
scale with 0 to 10 referencing 10 degrees centigrade. Measuring for these values
is performed upon exit of the turbine.

### Aircraft Fuel System

#### Engine Fuel System

The Phantom's fuel system is duplicated; that is, their pump and feed
arrangement is the same for both the left and right engines, and they share the
same set of fuel cells. Internal fuselage fuel between all 7 cells and the wing
tanks is just over 12,000 lbs of JP-4. With two external 315 gallon wing tanks,
that value increases to over 16,800 lbs. Adding the centerline 600 gallon tank
will bring the aircraft total fuel state to just under 20,800 lbs of fuel.

#### Transfer Sequence

![f4_fuel_system](img/f4_fuel_system.png)

The F-4 carries two internal wing tanks, along with seven fuel cells down the
length of the fuselage, with cell 1 resting just behind the aft cockpit, and the
remaining cells numbered in order to the rear of the aircraft. Cell 1 is the
feed cell for the engines; cells 4 and 6 each carry a hydraulic and an electric
transfer pump to supply fuel to cells 1 and 2. The remaining fuselage cells
perform a gravity feed into cells 1, 4, or 6. Cell 3 feeds cell 4 and 5, cell 2
feeds cell 1 and cell 7 feeds cell 6. With this arrangement, center of gravity
balance is maintained along the centerline. Cell 7 is the last cell to initiate
transfer in the sequence, and does not begin until the total fuel in cells 1 and
2 fall below 1800 lbs.

Fuel transfer from the wing and external tanks is performed by bleed air
pressurization once airborne; they will not transfer until the aircraft is off
the ground. Internal wing tank fuel is transferred into fuselage cells 1 and 3,
whereas fuel from external tanks are balanced between cells 1, 3, and 5.

#### Internal Wing Transfer Switch

Should it be necessary, a two position switch is available to turn off transfer
from the wing internal tanks. Found on the Fuel Control Panel, the Internal Wing
Transfer Switch can be toggled between NORMAL and STOP TRANS.

#### External Transfer Switch

External tank transfer is controlled by the External Transfer Switch; found on
the Fuel Control Panel, the switch has three positions: CENTER, OFF, and OUTBD
(Outboard), with OUTBD referring to the wing external tanks.

It is not possible to transfer from the wing tanks and external tanks at the
same time. If both are selected, the external tanks will take priority.

#### Fuel Boost System

![BoostInd](img/BoostInd.png)

Flow from Cell 1 to the engines is performed by a pair of boost pumps. The pumps
are installed at the bottom of the tank to provide fuel in the event of a
negative G excursion. The function of these pumps can be confirmed on the Fuel
Boost Pump Pressure Indicators found in the front cockpit. Engine idle pump flow
rate is 30 PSI, Â±5 pounds. To confirm a ground check, a pair of Boost Pump Check
switches are found on the fuel control panel. Holding one of these switches in
the CHECK position will perform an engine shutdown, and provide feedback on the
respective Pressure Indicator.

#### Fuel Quantity Indication System

#### Fuel Level Low Warning Light

When the sensor in Cell 2 detects a fuel weight of less than 1650 Â±200 lbs, the
FUEL LEVEL LOW warning will illuminate on the front cockpit telelight panel.
This illumination is independent of the Fuel Quantity Indication System, and can
be indicative of a transfer failure.

#### External Tanks Fuel Lights

Any time an external fuel tank is detected to not be flowing fuel into the
fuselage, a respective light will illuminate on the telelight panel- L EXT FUEL,
CTR EXT FUEL, or R EXT FUEL. These lights will only illuminate for the
respective external transfer- that is, if OUTBD is selected, CTR EXT FUEL cannot
illuminate, and vice versa. Because transfer can occur intermittently due to
flow from the tanks exceeding engine fuel consumption, the warning lamp is not
immediately indicative of an empty external tank, and should be checked against
the quantity indication system. Further, the lamps will illuminate when the air
refuel switch is set to EXTEND, with the ALL TANKS setting selected.

When air to air refueling, or when refueling on the ground and the tanks have
reached a full condition, the External Tanks Full lamps, found under the canopy
bow, will light.

#### Internal Wing Fuel Dump System

Fuel from the wings can be dumped directly, rather than requiring transfer into
the fuselage, using the Wing Fuel Dump Switch. This switch, when selected to
DUMP, will release fuel from the internal wing tanks at their dump lines at the
wing fold trailing edge. Flow rate is dependent on power setting and attitude,
higher engine RPM and positive pitch increases dump speed, whereas lower RPM and
a nose low condition reduces dump speed. In level flight at 85% RPM, the dump
flow rate is roughly 650 pounds per minute. Leading to the entire fuel being
dumped after roughly 15 minutes.

### Electrical Power Supply System

The F-4E derives electrical power from a pair of AC generators driven by the J79
engines, a pair of AC to DC transformers, and a battery for electrical functions
with the engines offline. In addition, the Phantom II can receive external
electrical power from ground crew. The two generator arrangement, while normally
working independently, includes a bus tie that can connect both buses together
to draw power from a single generator in case of failure.

#### Generator Indicator Lights

![GenInd](img/GenInd.png)

Three warning indicators are found on the generator control panel: LH GEN OUT,
RH GEN OUT, and BUS TIE OPEN. The respective GEN OUT warning will illuminate in
the event the generator in question fails. The indication of BUS TIE OPEN is an
acknowledgement that a single functioning generator is providing power to the
entire aircraft. In the event of a generator failure, the Master Caution will
also illuminate. However, in the event of a dual generator failure, neither GEN
OUT light will not illuminate.

#### Generator Control Switches

![GenCtl](img/GenCtl.png)

A pair of Generator Control Switches are found on the right console, one for
each engine. These three position switches- ON (Forward), OFF, ON - External
(Aft), control the state of each respective generator. In the event of a
possible generator failure, selecting OFF for the generator that is believed to
be offline will cause the power bus to provide electricity from the remaining
generator to the other half of the electrical system. The External On setting is
used for ground handling purposes when connected to external power, and provides
electricity to all but the instruments, the CNI, and AFCS.

#### Instrument Ground Power Switch

Power from an external source to the instrument buses (115/200 volt ac, 28 volt
ac, and 14 volt ac), can be provided by the Instrument Ground Power Switch (if
the generator switches are set to EXT ON), found on the the right wall in the
rear cockpit. Once external electrical power is disengaged or an engine
generator comes online, it will switch off.

### Hydraulic Power System

The hydraulic power system of the F-4E consists of three closed hydraulic
systems: Power Control System 1 (PC-1), Power Control System 2 (PC-2), and the
Utility System. Each aileron, spoiler, and stabilators have two hydraulic
actuators. The PC systems are the primary hydraulic delivery to the flight
control systems, with PC-1 powering the left side of the aircraft, and PC-2
powering the right; these actuate one of the two actuators on each flight
control surface. The Utility System drives the second actuator on the flight
control surfaces, acting as both a power assist and backup. Control is retained
in the event of a failure of one PC or the Utility System. One exclusion to this
is the stabilators- rather than using the Utility System as the secondary power,
an APU unit in the tail provides the additional and backup power for the
stabilators should PC system PSI to the stabilator actuators fall below 1000.

#### Auxiliary Power Unit Reject Switch

#### APU Light

In the event of handover to the stabilator APU, the APU light will illuminate on
the telelight panel. This does not activate the Master Caution.

#### Hydraulic Pressure Indicators

![HydPress](img/HydPress.png)

On the pedestal panel in the front cockpit is a pair of PSI indicators, one for
the PC systems and the other for the Utility system. The PC system gauge has two
pointers, labeled PC-1 and PC-2. Nominal operating power for all three systems
is 3000 PSI Â±250 PSI.

#### Hydraulic Systems Indicator Lights

In the event of a pressure loss on PC-1, PC-2, or the Utility system below 1500
PSI, or a detected outright pump failure, CHK HYD GAGES will illuminate on the
telelight panel along with the Master Caution warning. In the event of a Utility
system failure on the right side, no apparent pressure loss will display to
match the CHK HYD GAGES light, whereas a left side failure will show a loss of
200 PSI or more on the Utility system pressure indicator. In the event system
pressure recovers back to above 1750 PSI, the CHK HYD GAGES light will turn off.

With a CHK HYD GAGES warning, the Master Caution can be cleared by selecting the
reset; however, be aware that if the CHK HYD GAGES light is on at this time, a
subsequent hydraulic system failure will not re-trigger the Master Caution
warning.

Also, the Master Caution and CHK HYD GAGES lights can illuminate momentarily on
landing gear lowering or during high maneuvering due to system load- check the
pressure indicators; should they return to nominal, disregard the warnings as
they will reset momentarily.

### Pneumatic System

![Pneum](img/Pneum.png)

The pneumatic system provides power for the canopies, as well as emergency
operation for the landing gear and slats flaps systems. A Pneumatic Pressure
Indicator is found on the front cockpit pedestal panel to confirm function, and
indicates manifold pressure.

### F-4E Flight Controls

#### Control Sticks

A control stick is provided in both cockpits, with near-uniform switchology
between the two. A Trim Control is found on both sticks to provide force
reduction and minor flight path correction in the pitch and roll axis. Weapons
are deliverable through both a Trigger (for air to air missiles and the gun) and
a Bomb Release Switch. Both positions carry a Nose Gear Steering Switch that
doubles as a radar auto-acquisition control for the radar in visual range
combat, and sensor focus control for video-directed air to ground weapons. An
Emergency Quick Release lever on each stick is available to immediately
deactivate the anti-skid, ARI, autopilot, and stability augmentation. Unique to
the front cockpit control stick is the Air Refueling Release Button- a dual-role
control that performs the boom disconnect function its name implies, as well as
a number of weapon selection functions.

Also unique to the front cockpit stick is a force transducer, to allow the pilot
fine adjustment control of the AFCS with the autopilot functionality engaged. In
the event the force applied to the stick exceeds the AFCS breakout limit,
autopilot will be turned off.

#### Aileron-Spoiler Control and Stabilator Control Feel and Trim Systems

The Aileron-Spoiler Control System and the Stabilator Control System both offer
trim following; the former through a screwjack actuator, the latter using a
servo directed by the AFCS. These functions cause the stick to position relative
to the current trim and autopilot position when the crew member in control goes
"hands off". It is therefore advisable to maneuver the stick to the same
position, or to gently move the stick to "breakout force" prior to disengaging
the autopilot system to reduce the chance for an abrupt return to pilot control.

To confirm current state of the stabilator trim, a Stabilator Trim Position
Indicator is provided on the front cockpit left vertical panel.

![StabTrimInd](img/StabTrimInd.png)

#### Rudder Control System

Yaw axis control is directed by the rudder pedals found in both cockpits. To
offset any relative skidding due to wind effect, stores imbalance, or minor
engine output deviation, a Rudder Trim Switch is found on the engine control
panel in the front cockpit. On the ground, the pedals themselves can be pressed
independently for differential braking, and the rudder axis itself functions as
the nose wheel steering directional control when the Nose Wheel Steering button
on either control stick is pressed.

#### Aileron-Rudder Interconnect (ARI)

![ARIfuse](img/ARIfuse.png)

To assist in low speed turn coordination, the Phantom II includes an
Aileron-Rudder Interconnect. The system is engaged automatically with the Slats
Flap Switch in the Out and Down position, and below the flap blowup speed of 230
knots. With the system engaged, the rudder can be driven up to 10 degrees by the
interconnect to alleviate pilot workload. In the event either seat in command
requires the ARI deactivated, the system can be disconnected by pulling the
Emergency Quick Release switch on their respective control stick. Releasing the
switch will re-engage the ARI. Function of the ARI can always be overridden
through the rudder pedals.

#### Stability Augmentation System

The F-4 offers a three axis Stability Augmentation system, with independent
Pitch, Roll, and Yaw channels. The system is to smooth out flight in normal
cruise regimes, rather than provide enhancement in maneuvering. The control
panel for the Stab Aug system is found in the front cockpit.

The Pitch channel provides a maximum control authority to the stability
augmentation of one half degree (0.5) above or below the current pitch trim
setting.

The Roll channel gives the stability augmentation 7.5 degrees of control of the
ailerons, and up to 11 degrees of deflection to the spoilers.

The Yaw channel permits augmentation up to 5 degrees left or right from the
current rudder trim position.

Because the stability augmentation system can misinterpret roll oscillation in
high AoA maneuvering and inadvertently invoke adverse roll, it is suggested to
disable the Roll channel prior to aerobatics or combat to alleviate this
possibility.

With the Roll stability augmentation system engaged, roll rate using the rear
control stick can be less than that in the front cockpit relative to the amount
of deflection; conversely, when returning control to the front cockpit, the rate
can jump due to said difference.

#### Slats Flap System

The Slats Flap system is manually selected for takeoff and landing, then
automatically controlled relative to AoA for best handling performance in all
other flight regimes. Control is through a three position switch found outboard
of the left throttle handle in the front cockpit and driven by the aircraft
hydraulic system. The three switch positions are Norm, Out, and Out and Down,
and the resulting command can be moderated based on whether or not the landing
gear being deployed.

![SlatsRelative](img/SlatsRelative.png)

Norm is the standard in-flight position, locking the Flaps and automatically
programming the Slat deployment as a function of AoA.

Out deploys the Slats to their fully deployed position. Should the landing gear
be deployed, both the Slats and Flaps will deploy.

Out and Down fully deploys both the Slats and the Flaps. Should the landing gear
not be down, the Wheels Light on the Telelight Panel will illuminate and flash.

Both cockpits have a Slats Flap Indicator, which read In and Out, along with a
barber-pole reading when the surfaces are in transition.

![SltFlpInd](img/SltFlpInd.png)

In the Norm position, Maneuvering Slat deployment is a function of AoA; above
11.5 units they will extend, then retract when the aircraft is reduced below
10.5 units. Maneuvering Slat operation includes a speed-induced blowback; slats
will retract due to air pressure between 568 to 602 knots.

![SlatsOvrd](img/SlatsOvrd.png)

To the rear of the Fuel Control Panel in the front cockpit is the Slat Override
Switch. Guarded, this switch has two positions: Norm and In. Defaulted to Norm
under the guard, switching to In forces retraction of the Slats no matter the
current state of the aircraft- AoA or Slats Flap Switch position. Actuating the
Override will give a SLATS IN warning on the Telelight Panel and illuminate
Master Caution.

The Slats Flaps system also has an Emergency system; handles are found on the
Slats Flaps control panel in the front cockpit, and next to the rear cockpit
throttle pair. The emergency system uses pneumatic pressure, and does not
require electrical power to force deployment. The emergency system can only
function once, and can be actuated at any airspeed; however, above 230 knots,
the Flaps will retract based on air pressure, and the normal Slat retraction
speeds also apply.

#### Speed Brakes

Underneath the aircraft and close to the rear Sparrow recesses are the speed
brakes, installed on the wings. The speed brakes are driven by the aircraft's
hydraulic system and actuated by a three position switch found on the inboard
throttle in both cockpits. Either switch will actuate the brakes. The positions
are Out, Stop, and In; the first and last positions are momentary (reverting to
Stop upon being released).

Brake actuation illuminates the Speed Brake Out Indicator Light found on the
Telelight Panel. Brake deployment and illumination of the Indicator does not
trigger the Master Caution.

#### Angle of Attack System

To precisely monitor and control aircraft flight performance, the Angle of
Attack System (AoA) provides visual and audio confirmation of current
parameters. Included in the system are the Angle of Attack Indicators found in
both cockpits, the illuminated Angle of Attack Indexers, as well as the AoA
Aural Tone System.

#### Indicators

![AoAInd](img/AoAInd.png)

The Angle of Attack Indicator dials register AoA values from 0 to 30 units, with
indications for weight-relative optimum altitude cruise (7.9 units) , approach
(19.2 units), and stall (30 units). A matrix can be found in the appendices to
calculate optimum cruise altitude by gross weight.

It is important to note that extension of the landing gear and thus the nose
wheel door changes the airflow around the probe causing to indicate higher
angles by 1 unit. The approach airspeeds account for that. Therefore, performing
an approach with the gear retracted, will cause the indicators to show
approximately 1 unit low, and the aircraft will be roughly 5 knots fast for an
on-speed approach.

#### Indexers

![AoA](img/AoA.png)

The AoA Indexers, found on the windshield frame of the front cockpit, and above
the instrument panel in the rear, display color coded and directional symbology
for the on-speed approach value of 19.2 units once the landing gear have been
lowered.

#### Aural Tone System

The Aural Tone System provides audible feedback in maneuvering flight and during
landing configuration. Beginning above 15 units AoA with gear down, and 21 units
AoA with the gear up and slats in, a pulse will be heard by both crew-members.

The rate of the pulse can vary from 1.5 to 20 pulses per second, with increasing
frequency based on higher AoA values.

This tone can be lowered in volume below 20.3 units AoA gear down/25 units gear
up with controls in each cockpit; exceeding these values will cause the system
to override the volume limits and deliver the warning pulses at full volume.

The respective knobs are labelled STALL WARNING and can be found on the right
side in either cockpit. They must not to be confused with the AURAL TONE CONTROL
knobs, which control weapon related tones.

#### Stall Warning Vibrator

The left front cockpit pedal includes a Stall Warning Vibrator, which is
activated over 22.3 units Angle of Attack. This physical (and in DCS- audible)
indication is given to make the pilot aware of the potential of an impending
stall and provide enough time to reduce AoA and prevent the loss of control of
the aircraft. Reducing AoA below the threshold will deactivate the warning.

### Landing Gear System and Ground Handling Controls

The F-4 Phantom uses a conventional tricycle landing gear arrangement, driven by
the Utility hydraulic system. In the event Utility hydraulics are offline, an
emergency extension system compressed air is available to lower the gear for
landing.

#### Landing Gear Control Handle

![GearHandle](img/GearHandle.png)

The Landing Gear Control Handle is found on the left instrument panel in the
front cockpit, with a wheel-shaped knob for identification.

#### Landing Gear Emergency Extension Handles

Emergency landing gear extension is driven by a pair of compressed air bottles
carrying sufficient charge for one lowering of the gear. The emergency extension
is commanded in the front cockpit is performed using the Gear Control Handle;
pulling the handle aft in any position releases the compressed air into the
landing gear hydraulic system, forcing the gear doors to open and the gear to
lower and lock. Extension can also be performed in an emergency from the back
seat using a handle on the left sub-panel marked EMERG LDG GEAR. Pulling this
handle performs the same action as pulling the front cockpit gear control handle
aft.

#### Landing Gear Warning Lights

On the upper left corner of the front cockpit instrument panel is a WHEELS
warning lamp that illuminates when the aircraft is below 230 knots without the
landing gear lowered. Selecting the gears down or up when the WHEELS lamp is
illuminated will cause a warning lamp installed in the Landing Gear Control
handle to light up red.

#### Landing Gear Position Indicators

![GearPos](img/GearPos.png)

Status indicators for the landing gear system are found in both cockpits on the
left sub-panel. The indicators are three windows, one for each gear station. The
position of the gear are shown in their respective windows with the word UP when
up and doors are closed, a barber pole (angled white and black bars) when the
gear and doors are in transition either closing or opening, and the illustration
of a wheel when the gears are down and locked.

#### Nose Gear Steering

Nose Gear Steering is actuated using the referenced button on the control stick
in either cockpit. Holding the button down permits the crew member to steer the
aircraft using the rudder. Steering limit of the nose gear is 70 degrees from
centerline in both directions.

#### Wheel Brakes

Differential steering is provided with weight on wheels using rudder pedal
deflection. Assistance in braking performance is provided by an included
Anti-Skid System, which engages with the aircraft over 30 knots. Braking
function is delayed by the Anti-Skid System on landing until the right main gear
has been in contact with the ground for 3 seconds, or the wheels reach 50 knots
of rotation.

#### Anti-Skid Control Switch

Next to the oxygen quantity gauge in the front cockpit is the Anti-Skid Control
Switch, which is used to turn the system ON or OFF.

#### Anti-Skid Inoperative Light

Found on the front cockpit left console, the ANTI-SKID INOPERATIVE light will
indicate when the Anti-Skid Switch is set to OFF, the Emergency Quick Release
Lever is pressed, or there is a system issue.

#### Emergency Anti-Skid Quick Release Lever

Should the Anti-Skid system appear to malfunction during a rollout, the system
can be immediately disengaged by holding down the Quick Release Lever found on
the control sticks in either cockpit. This will illuminate ANTI-SKID INOPERATIVE
warning.

#### Emergency Hydraulic Brake System

In the event of a Utility hydraulic system failure, emergency differential
braking is provided by pulling the Emergency Brake Handle on the lower left side
of the instrument panel in either cockpit. Doing so forces hydraulic pressure
from a reserve accumulator, and provides enough power for approximately 10 brake
applications.

#### Arresting Hook System

The Phantom carries a retractable arresting hook for ground stopping in
emergency takeoff and landing situations that will reach the strip overrun.
Placing the Arresting Hook Handle in the front cockpit into the DOWN position
will lower the hook in approximately five seconds. Lowering the hook will
illuminate a red warning lamp in the Hook Handle, and illuminate the HOOK DOWN
warning on the telelight panel.

The system is not intended to be used for carrier operations.

#### Drag Chute System

The F-4E has an available Drag Chute to reduce landing roll as necessary. The
chute can also be used for spin recovery. Deployment of the chute is performed
by rotating the handle found in the front cockpit. The chute is drawn from its
door with a smaller pilot chute. Once the chute has deployed and performed
sufficient braking action or the aircraft has recovered into a controllable
state, the chute is jettisoned by pressing the button and pulling the handle
back, then lowering it. This action releases the chute cables and allows it to
pull free.

#### Wing Fold System

The F-4E includes a wing fold system to assist in maintenance and ground
handling. Unlike prior models, the wing fold apparatus on the F-4E is unpowered,
and requires ground crew members to manually move the outboard panels with the
fold control activated to release the locking mechanism.

## Primary Flight Instruments

### True Airspeed Indicators

![TASInd](img/TASInd.png)

True Airspeed Indicators are provided in both cockpits, and carry a calibrated
range from 150 to 1500 knots. While the indicators can read as low as 0 knots,
the lack of calibration below the stated range means values less than 150 knots
are inaccurate. At high rates of airspeed change, there may be a lag of up to
+-10 knots in measurement.

The rear True Airspeed Indicator is removed for DMAS equipment in aircraft so
configured; however, TAS is provided as a DMAS function.

### Ground Speed Indicator

A ground speed indicator is provided in both cockpits, with a range from 0 to
1999 knots. Ground speed is provided by the navigation computer, with the source
dependent on INS function. If the INS online, the ground speed value calculated
is based on the provided velocity, and can display correct information as low as
0 knots. When the INS is offline, the air data computer performs a calculation
using crew-entered wind information, which can cause errors of up to 150
displaying while the aircraft is on the ground with the parking brake set.

With DMAS installed, the rear ground speed indicator is removed, as GS is a DMAS
function.

### Accelerometers

![GGauge](img/GGauge.png)

Both cockpits retain accelerometers for monitoring G load; the accelerometers
carry 3 needles- one for current G loading, and a positive and negative G
loading needle for the highest load G load detected since the accelerometer was
reset. To reset the gauge, the PUSH TO SET button will return the recording
pointers to positive 1 G.

### Airspeed/Mach Indicators

![MachInd](img/MachInd.png)

Found in both cockpits is a combination Airspeed/Mach indicator. The indicators
provide a fixed airspeed scale at the middle of the indicator, reading values
from 80 to 850 knots, and a rotating Mach scale number scale to the outside,
with readings from 0.4 to 2.5 Mach. A two position knob offers both an airspeed
index with a functional range between 80 and 195 knots, and a Mach index pointer
with a range between 225 knots and 850 knots.

### Altimeter

![Altim](img/Altim.png)

Altimeters in both cockpits provide a functional range from 0 to 80,000 feet. To
the outside of the indicator is a pointer scale, gradation in 50 foot units with
markings every 100 feet (from 1 to 10). Left of center is the counter,
increasing and decreasing in value in thousand foot increments on the black pair
of rollers, hundred foot increments on the white. Barometric scale adjustment
can be performed using a dial. A three position switch provides the RESET
function for the altimeter to draw signals from the air data computer for normal
operation, and the STBY (standby) option to only use the pneumatic pressure to
determine altitude. Standby mode is noted with a red flag in the indicator. In
the event of an altimeter or air data computer failure in normal operation, the
STBY flag will appear, and cannot be reset. This can also be followed by
warnings on the telelight panel.

### Magnetic Compass

![StbyMagComp](img/StbyMagComp.png)

A magnetic compass is provided in each cockpit for use in the event of a
navigation or electrical system failure.

### Vertical Velocity Indicators (VVI)

![VVI](img/VVI.png)

VVI Indicators are provided in both cockpits, and show the rate of climb or
descent of the aircraft, calculated via atmospheric pressure change using the
static pressure system.

### Radar Altimeter

![RadAlt](img/RadAlt.png)

Found in the front cockpit, the Radar Altimeter has a functional range of 0 to
5000 feet above ground level. The radar altimeter functions from 0 to 30 degrees
in bank angle, or 0 to 35 degrees angle in pitch. The dial scale reads from 0 to
100 feet, and the system includes a red low altitude warning light that
illuminates when the aircraft is detected below a pilot-set altitude.

Activation and setting of the radar altimeter warning height is done with the
same knob; turning the knob clockwise initially activates the indicator,
removing the displayed OFF flag; continuing to rotate the knob moves the
reference marker that will determine the altitude which triggers the low
altitude warning. A self-test, initiated by pressing the function control
switch, shows 35 +-15 feet. Above 5000 feet or with unreliable signals, the
pointer hides behind a mask, showing the OFF flag. The OFF appears also when
power is lost- the indicator will then present the last altitude detected above
ground level at the time of this occurring.

### Turn and Slip Indicators

In the front cockpit, a turn and slip indicator is added to the ADI on the
instrument panel; while the needle provides correct direction of turn, it does
not provide proper turn rate information. A conventional 4 minute turn and slip
indicator is found on the rear cockpit panel.

### Rear Cockpit Attitude Indicator

The AHRS provides attitude information to the Attitude Indicator found on the
rear cockpit instrument panel regardless of the Reference System Selector Switch
position. A trim knob provides the ability to adjust the attitude sphere to
reference the aircraft correctly. Should power be disconnected from the
indicator or AHRS, the OFF flag will display.

### Pitot-Static System

The Pitot-Static system provides impact and static pressure to flight
instrumentation, the Air Data Computer, and airspeed-driven switches. To
alleviate icing of the pitot head, a Pitot Heat Switch is found in the front
cockpit right console.

### Air Data Computer System

Using a variety of static, attitude, and environmental inputs, the Air Data
Computer (ADC) provides the pneumatic and electrical inputs to the AFCS, Fire
Control System, Air Induction System, the INS, the LCOSS, navigational computer,
as well as manages the variable bypass bellmouth system for the engines. Flight
through weather such as ice or rain can induce errors in the performance of
these systems until the condition has cleared, and this should be taken into
account.

### Static Pressure Compensator

The Static Pressure Compensator (SPC) performs correction of altimeter lag
caused by rapid altitude change. The SPC must be reset after engine startup on
each flight; this is performed using the CADC switch near the throttles by
selecting RESET CORR, then selecting NORM. Should an issue occur during flight
causing a STATIC CORR OFF warning, an attempt to reset the SPC can be performed
with RESET CORR. Should the STATIC CORR OFF warning fail to clear, care must be
taken in all diving maneuvers, as substantial altimeter lag will occur.

### ALT ENCODER OUT Light

The Altitude Encoder Unit provides precise (to 100 feet) altitude data to the
IFF for Mode C traffic control, as well as performs the correction relative to
the pneumatic input at the altimeter. Should the SPC be offline, the ALT ENCODER
OUT light will also illuminate to confirm lagged altimeter performance, and
potential Mode C issues.

## Navigation, Communication, and Identification Systems

### Flight Director Group

Accurate course navigation is provided by the Flight Director Group, which
includes the Flight Director Computer, the Horizontal Situation Indicator (HIS)
along with the Navigation Function Selector Panel in the front cockpit, and the
Bearing Distance Heading Indicator (BDHI) together with the Navigation Mode
Selector Switch in the rear cockpit.

#### Navigation Function Selector Panel

Found on the front cockpit instrument panel, the Navigation Function Selector
Panel has two knobs- a Bearing/Distance Selector Knob and a Mode Selector Knob.

#### Bearing Distance Selector Knob

The Bearing Distance Selector Knob sets the bearing pointer and range indication
displays on the HSI. Positions are VOR/TAC, TAC, ADF/TAC, and NAV COMP.

In VOR/TAC mode, magnetic and relative bearing to the VOR station and range to
the TACAN station are provided on the HSI bearing pointer and range indicator.

With TAC mode, magnetic and relative bearing and range to the selected TACAN
station are displayed.

In ADF/TAC mode, magnetic and relative bearing to the selected ADF station and
range to the TACAN station are displayed.

And in NAV COMP mode, magnetic and relative bearing and range are provided to
the destination set in the navigation computer.

#### Mode Selector Knob

The Mode Selector Knob controls the remaining informational displays on the HSI,
as well as the pitch and bank steering bars on the ADI. The mode selector knob
operates independently from the bearing pointer and range indicator, and the
selector positions are VOR/ILS, TAC, NAV COMP, and HDG. Navigation modes set by
this knob will be indicated by an illuminated word message when the instrument
panel lights are on; available mode word messages are TAC (TACAN), NAV
(navigation computer), UHF (ADF), MAN (HDG entry), ILS (instrument landing
system), and TGT (target). TGT illuminates that the WSO has provided a target
entry and pressed TGT on the Cursor Control Panel.

#### Flight Director Switch

The Flight Director Switch turns ON and OFF the Flight Director Computer pitch
and bank angle steering clues, visible on the ADI. Selecting OFF removes these
bars from view.

#### Horizontal Situation Indicator

The Horizontal Situation Indicator displays a top-down plan view of current
navigation, with cues provided relative to the selected navigation mode selector
position.

In VOR/ILS, the Heading Set Knob is used to enter the desired magnetic heading.
The Course Set knob is used to set the VOR radial or inbound localizer. Once
set, the Deviation Indicator shows current deviation from the selected course.

TACAN mode presents information relative to the current selected TACAN beacon.
To provide full information, the Bearing/Distance Switch should be set to TAC.
The course arrow and course selector window are set using the Course Set knob to
the desired TACAN course. Once set, the Deviation Indicator and aircraft symbol
provide the top down display relative to the set course, with a maximum
deviation deflection of 10 degrees. The Heading Set knob is used to set a
desired TACAN course for bank steering presentation on the ADI. If the heading
marker is not set, bank steering on the ADI will not be correct to intercept the
desired course. A To-From indicator displays when the mode selector is in TACAN
or VOR/ILS mode when either are tuned and received; once the course is
intercepted, the indication references whether the current course is taking the
aircraft to or from the tuned station.

NAV COMP mode displays magnetic ground track on the course arrow and the course
selector window relative to the current navigation computer fix. The bank
steering bar provides steering information to direct an approach to the command
heading.

With HDG mode active, the course arrow and deviation are slaved to the lubber
line and aircraft magnetic heading. The course selector window displays the
current selected magnetic heading, which is adjusted using the Heading Set knob.
The given course information is applied for an ADI bank steering command.

#### Attitude Director Indicator

The ADI provides command steering to intercept selected headings, TACAN
stations, tracks, VOR radials, or navigation computer destinations. Bank
steering instruction is presented using the bank steering bar, which can
reference angles up to 35 degrees. Should a bank angle in excess of 35 degrees
be desired, the instructed angle can be disregarded during the turn. When the
Heading Set knob has been used to enter the correct target heading, the
intercept presentation is accurate within a 60 degree field of a TACAN course,
or 90 degrees for a VOR radial. Additionally, a Glideslope Pointer is provided
for relative glideslope position indication during an ILS approach.

Upon startup of the ADI, an OFF warning flag will be displayed until the
AN/AJB-7 gyro has aligned. This can also appear due to power loss or a signal
failure. The flag does not present if a system failure occurs outside of the
AN/AJB-7.

#### Bearing Distance Heading Indicator

The Bearing Distance Heading Indicator (BDHI) displays navigation information
using two needles, referred to as the No. 1 and No. 2 pointers, which receive
inputs controlled by the WSO Navigation Mode Selector Switch.

When the upper position is selected to TACAN/ADF/UHF, the no. 1 pointer
indicates UHF bearing, and the no. 2 pointer indicates the TACAN bearing. If
there is no TACAN signal, both pointers indicate the ADF bearing.

With the middle position selected- VOR/TAC, the no. 1 pointer indicates the VOR
bearing, the no. 2 pointer indicates the TACAN bearing, and the range indicator
provides distance to the TACAN station. In the absence of a TACAN signal, both
pointers indicate the VOR station.

In the lower position, NAV COMP, the no. 1 pointer indicates bearing to the
navigation computer target coordinates, and the no. 2 pointer indicates magnetic
ground track. The range indicator notes distance to the target coordinates.

### AN/ASN-63 Inertial Navigation System

The AN/ASN-63 INS provides the F-4E aircrew and integrated weapons delivery
system with real time accurate positional, velocity, attitude, and heading
information. When the system is aligned to its most precise extent in
gyrocompass mode, the INS is accurate to 3 nautical miles per hour of circular
error probability (CEP).

#### Inertial Measurement Platform

The system uses a four gimbal (outer roll, pitch, inner roll, azimuth) inertial
navigating platform, with the dual roll gimbals providing redundancy to
eliminate a gimbal lock in outer roll/azimuth gimbal alignment.

Installed on the platform are a pair of G-200 two-axis gyros, with the upper
gyro axis aligned for spin on the north-south axis while the lower gyro aligns
for east-west spin; torque detection in each gyro tracks the perpendicular axes-
ergo, the high gimbal detects east/west rotation, while the low gyro detects
north/south rotation. In this way, rotation in all three dimensions are
represented. The gyros are floated, and proper operation can only take place
once the fluid has attained operating temperature (160 degrees F); the system is
effectively climate controlled across the altitude operating range of the
Phantom. A series of precision magnetic torquers provide localization movement,
while acceleration pickoffs function within a separate electromagnetic field
perform the actual data capture from the displacements of the gyroscopes.

Along the platform, set orthogonally (at 90 degree respective positions) are a
trio of A-200D accelerometers. These accelerators, similarly floated to the
gyros, with a similar arrangement of torquers and displacement pickers to
provide velocity capture. Increasing the accuracy of these evaluations is the
inclusion of a tuning fork, the resonance from which eliminates effectively all
static friction in the motion capture assembly.

#### Navigational Computer and Output Signal Distribution

The respective captured motion signals from the gyroscopes and accelerometers
are amplified in the LN-12D navigational computer, which then performs the earth
reference integration. The LN-12D compensates for all longitudes and can
effectively track as high as 80 degrees latitude, where the mechanical
limitations of calculating tangent relative to the equator is too high for the
device.

The AN/ASN-63 provides information to other systems in the Phantom from the
OSDU, or Output Signal Distribution Unit. The OSDU provides ground speed,
north-south and east-west velocity, total velocity, inertially stabilized
altitude, climb angle, true inertial heading, ground track, and drift angle. The
WRCS receives inertial true heading, ground track, drift correction angle, and
drift angle for its ballistics computer. Drift angle is captured for the BDHI,
HSI, and FDC. Drift correction angle is also provided to the radar and LCOSS.

#### Alignment Options

The LN-12 has three modes of alignment on aircraft start: BATH, Heading Memory
(HDG MEM), and Gyrocompass aignment. Prior to performing any alignment, with the
mode knob in STBY, the position update switch on the Nav Computer Control Panel
should be selected to NORMAL, local magnetic variation should be entered on the
variation counter, and the position counter should be set to local latitude and
longitude. Doing so will greatly expedite gyrocompass alignment. Further,
alignment should not be performed with the wings in their folded position, as
the magnetic flux valve that provides compass synchronization wil be 60 degrees
outside of normal position.

The INS also includes an in-flight position update option, should the aircrew
note gross deviation from known location fixes.

#### Best Available True Heading

Once set to ALIGN, the BATH lamp will illuminate after 75 seconds. Once in BATH,
the INS is accurate to roughly 5 and a half nautical miles per hour CEP,
although higher inaccuracies can be seen. Once BATH is achieved, NAV mode can be
selected and the aircraft flown with the above caveat.

#### Heading Memory Alignment

Accessed by selecting HDG MEM, this alignment method provides minimum alignment
time with a relative CEP at the best end of BATH (5.5 nmi) by using a previously
stored alignment . Beneath the red guard on the control panel is the HDG
MEM/GYRO COMP switch.

To access the accelerated HDG MEM alignment mode, the guard must be raised and
the switch actuated up, and the INS mode switch placed to ALIGN until the ALIGN
lamp illuminates. Once the lamp is lit, the INS can be placed into NAV mode. If
time allows, STBY mode can be selected to allow proper heating of the gyroscopes
(which goes through the illumination/off cycle as above). Any other available
time prior to moving the aircraft can be spent in ALIGN to further increase
system accuracy.

When HDG MEM mode alignment is complete, the guard should be closed placing the
switch back into GYRO COMP once NAV mode has been selected for the INS.

#### Gyrocompass Alignment

Maximum system precision is found by allowing the INS to perform a full
Gyrocompassing alignment. This method permits the gyros to find the most
accurate true north reference possible, but can entail substantial amounts of
time- and even greater time based on inaccurate or missing magnetic variation
setting entry prior to powering the INS on. As an example- for a one degree
compass heading error, the time to achieve maximum accuracy on the system is
approximately five minutes, which attains an accuracy of Â±10 minutes of arc
alignment, giving the aforementioned 3 nautical miles of deviation per hour. The
minimum amount of time to complete a Gyrocompassing alignment once BATH or HDG
MEM level alignment is achieved is 50 additional seconds, while a normal
alignment takes around 5 minutes. If the aircraft is aligned at 70 degrees of
latitude or more, additional time should be expected.

Once Gyrocompass alignment is complete, the ALIGN indicator will flash,
indicating the system is now at full alignment. NAV mode on the INS can be
entered at any time during gyrocompassing, but best accuracy will not be
attained until the ALIGN indicator flashes.

#### In-Flight Alignment

In the event of substantial latitude/longitude error versus a known radar or
visual location fix, the aircraft should be flown straight and level, with the
Reference System Selector Knob in STBY. Once done, the INS Mode Knob should be
selected to OFF, then to STBY for 15 seconds. After 15 seconds, the Mode should
be returned to NAV, and the Reference Selector back to PRIM.

#### Navigation Computer

The ASN-46A Nav Computer is used for general navigation and tactical route
planning. The system contains both a great circle and rhumb line computational
capabilities, with the former being used for larger distance bearing
calculations (over 120 miles), and the latter for closer range accuracy. The Nav
Computer functions solely using aircraft-based instruments, ergo the INS, Air
Data Computer, and the magnetic compass; it can receive no information from the
ILS, VOR, or TACAN systems.

The system can maintain relative bearing and distance from up to two specific
waypoints at a time (identified as Target 1 and Target 2, with Target 2 being
held in memory), and this information is shown on the BDHI and ADI in real time.
For data to appear on the BDHI, the Navigation Selection Switch must be
positioned in NAV COMP.

The computer also provides confirmation of current LN-12 precision, using a pair
of lights marked LAT and LONG, as well as the Variation Sync Meter. When these
lamps are off, the current displayed position coordinates are within 1 1/2 arc
minutes precision. Magnetic variation detected by way of the INS gyroscopes is
compared against the manual performed prior to INS powerup via the Magnetic
Variation Control knob, and displayed on the Variation Sync Meter. This
deviation can be corrected on the Magnetic Variation Control Knob to bring the
sync to center. Although the magnetic variation control knob has no effect on
the meter in air data mode, positive correction prior to INS loss increases the
air data mode precision.

The Nav Computer can function in either Inertial or Air Data mode. Inertial mode
is the default, meaning that cockpit indicators will provide range and bearing
as well as ground track and heading using the flight instruments.

In the event of an INS failure, the Nav Computer reverts to Air Data mode. In
Air Data mode. the rear pilot must continually monitor and adjust true wind
direction and speed, magnetic variation, and target waypoint coordinates, as the
only dead reckoning inputs available to the computer is true airspeed (from the
air data computer) and magnetic heading from the compass system. When the system
reverts to Air Data mode, the AIR DATA MODE lamp will illuminate.

During startup, the Position Control Knobs, Wind Control Knobs, and Magnetic
Variation Control Knob are used to enter known latitude, longitude, wind
direction and speed, and magnetic variation for the location of the aircraft at
that time.

#### Waypoint Entry

Entering waypoints and target information is performed using the Function
Selector Knob and the two Target Control Knobs, one for latitude, and the other
longitude.

| Name     | Description                                                                                               |
| -------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| OFF      | System off.                                                                                               |
| STBY     | System powered, but no latitude or longitude reference performed versus the values in the Target windows. |
| TARGET 1 | Provides readouts of range and bearing on the currently entered Target window values.                     |
| TARGET 2 | Selects range and bearing information from previously stored Target window values.                        |
| RESET    | Deletes any previously saved Target window values, stores currently entered Target window values.         |

Because of the Target 2 memory function, in practice the aircrew has some
flexibility in process depending on the demands of the mission. As an example,
should the Phantom crew be tasked with a CAP or defensive role relative to a
known position (ie, bullseye), the coordinates of that location can be loaded
into the Target Control values, the Function Selector placed into RESET, and
then returned to Target 2. Any change from Target 2 to Target 1 or STBY, then
back to Target 2 will maintain said location value, easily accessed.

The other common technique was "leapfrogging":

1. On startup, the second waypoint would be stored in Target 2 memory (entry on
   the Target Control values, Function to RESET, then back to Target 2).

2. Once the second waypoint location was stored, the rear pilot would then
   select Target 1 for live entry of the first in-flight waypoint on the Target
   Control values.

3. During flyout to the first waypoint, upon passing it over, Target 2 would be
   selected as the destination, and the next waypoint (3) would be entered on
   the Target Control Values.

4. Upon flyover of waypoint 2, the Function Knob would be positioned to RESET,
   then back to Target 2- now pulling the waypoint 3 values from the Target
   Control values.

This process would be continued over the course of the flight, and allow the
rear pilot the ability to immediately switch to Target 1 for a quick check of
relative position to another location of interest if required, or an in-flight
detour (such as to a tanker track), then return back to the next stored waypoint
for navigation.

#### In Flight Updating

In flight updating with the Nav Computer is performed using direct overflight of
known target points, using a visual or radar fix, over a TACAN station, or via
instruction from GCI.

##### Inertial Mode Update

With the Nav Computer in Inertial mode, the aircraft is flown straight and level
at a known fix location.

1. On arrival, the Position Update Switch is placed in the SET position. Doing
   so disengages the longitude and latitude position counters.

2. The position longitude and latitude counters are set using their respective
   knobs for the know location.

3. Prior to arrival at the fix point, the Position Update Switch is placed and
   held in the FIX position.

4. Upon direct flyover of the fix point, the Position Update Switch is released,
   allowing it to fall back into NORMAL.

The correction rate of the Nav Computer is roughly 3 minutes latitude or
longitude per second, and the Update Switch must be held in FIX long enough to
account for the largest value. As an example, if the deviation is 9 minutes in
latitude and 4 in longitude, the FIX position must be held at least 3 seconds
prior to the aircraft directly passing the fix location. Further, the switch
actuation from SET to FIX must be smooth and direct, as there is a half second
time delay in the computer in the pass-through of NORMAL.

##### Air Data Mode Update

In Air Data Mode, the Nav Computer can be updated as in the Inertial Mode using
the SET/FIX method, or via direct rotation of the latitude and longitude
position knobs. Using the latter method requires the Function Select Knob to be
placed in STBY, TARGET 1, or TARGET 2. The SET/FIX method is preferred, as doing
so allows for instant update upon fix position flyover and release of the
switch.

### TACAN (Tactical Air Navigation) System

Bearing and range information to transmitting stations is provided by the TACAN
system. The TACAN system can receive information from ground stations as far as
390 miles, and air to air TACAN equipped aircraft to 200 miles. The TACAN system
provides the identity of the transmitting station and the dependability of the
signal received. Course deviation is calculated and displayed on navigation
systems set in TACAN mode. If a TACAN signal is invalid, a warning is displayed.
In the event of a signal loss, the system continues providing range tracking for
15 seconds, and bearing tracking for 3 seconds. The system will perform a
self-test after a signal loss to confirm function on the control panel. Two
TACAN antennas are provided, and signal switching is automatic to maintain the
best signal.

#### TACAN Controls

TACAN controls are found on the navigation control panel in each cockpit.

##### Navigation Command Button and Indicator

The NAV CMD button and indicator performs command authority switch between the
two cockpits, and are found on the upper right corner of the Communication
Control Panel. A green light illuminates to the left of the button in the
cockpit that has control of the navigation system.

**Mode Selector Knob, BRG/DIST Selector Switch, and Navigation Function
Selector**

As detailed in the Flight Director Group section, the Mode Selector, BRG/DIST
Selector, and Navigation Function Selector determine the presentation of TACAN
information on the HSI, the ADI, and the BDHI.

##### Navigation Channel Control Knobs

On the TACAN Control Panel beneath the channel window, a pair of knobs set the
desired TACAN channel. The left knob controls the tens and hundred digits of the
channel. The right knob selects the units of the operating channel, and the
outer knob sets the X or Y channel; both X and Y have 126 available channels.
While the indicator can show 127, 128, and 129, these values are nonfunctional.

##### TACAN Function Selector Knob

OFF: the TACAN system is deenergized

REC: only the receiver is energized, and the system receives and decodes bearing
signals from the TACAN station and provides bearing information for the HSI,
BDHI, and ADI displays.

T/R: the TACAN generates distance information along with bearing; the distance
is then added to the HSI and BDHI, provided in nautical miles.

A/A REC: the TACAN receives and displays bearing information for the HSI, BDHI,
and ADI steering display from an aircraft providing a TACAN beacon signal. The
channel selected must be 63 channels above or below the transmitting aircraft
beacon, on the same X or Y channel range; for example, a tanker transmitting on
83X will be received on 20X.

A/A TR: the TACAN interrogates the equipped aircraft beacon to add range
information to the HSI and BDHI. The channel selection method remains the same
as A/A REC.

##### Navigation Volume Control Knob

The NAV VOL knob controls the headset audible volume of the received TACAN
station.

### VOR/ILS System

The VHF omnidirectional range instrument landing system, or VOR/ILS, provides
precise bearing and course deviation information from a transmitting ground
station. Additionally, the aircraft is able to use precision landing approach
and descent capabilities at localizer equipped fields. Guidance information from
the VOR/ILS system is provided to the pilot on the BDHI, ADI, and HSI. VOR/ILS
function is enabled on these displays using the appropriate Flight Director
Group control selections on the Bearing/Distance Selector switch, the Navigation
Mode Selector switch, and the Flight Director Switch.

#### VOR/ILS Control Panel

The control panel for the VOR/ILS is found on the front cockpit left console;
the panel includes a frequency indicator, two frequency select knobs, a volume
control (marked NAV VOL), a marker beacon volume control knob (MB VOL), and a
VOL/MRK TEST pushbutton.

#### VOR/ILS Frequency Selector Knobs

The Frequency Selector Knobs is a dual actuation concentric knob; the outer ring
selects the number to the left of the decimal point on the frequency indicator,
whereas the inner knob selects numbers to the right.

#### NAV VOL Knob and MB VOL Knob

The NAV VOL knob both activates the VOL/ILS system, as well as controls the
audible volume for the front cockpit. The knob is turned clockwise to power the
system on, then further to increase the volume. The MB VOL knob adjusts the
volume of the marker beacon audio in the front cockpit.

#### WSO Course Indicator

In the rear cockpit is the Course Indicator, on the main instrument panel; the
indicator displays relative heading for the course set in the course selector
window, as well as later and vertical position relative to the ILS localizer and
glide slope entered by the pilot. In this way, the WSO can assist the pilot in
achieving and maintaining glide slope. The controls for the indicator are purely
for the WSOs reference, and do not interact with the Flight Director Group
displays in the front cockpit.

Components of the course indicator are a TO-FROM indicator (does not function
with ILS), a course deviation scale, a glide slope deviation scale, a COURSE
selector window, a course SET knob, a heading pointer and heading scale, a
marker beacon light, a GLIDE SLOPE indicator, a course deviation indicator (LOC
OR RANGE), and course and glide slope OFF warning flags.

Once the pilot has selected an ILS frequency, the WSO must set a course inbound
heading in the selector window using the SET knob.

### Intercom System

The Intercom System provides communication between the pilot, WSO, and ground
crew, and functions with external power, or the aircraft battery once either
Engine Master Switch is in the ON position.

#### Intercom Control Panel

Each cockpit has an Intercom Control Panel, providing a volume control knob, an
amplifier selector, and a function selector switch.

#### Volume Control Knob

The Intercom Volume Control knob sets relative volume level for the given
cockpit; increasing volume is performed by turning the knob clockwise. The
Intercom Volume Control does not affect any other cockpit audio signal.

#### Function Selector Switch

The function selector provides COLD MIC, HOT MIC (always active), and RADIO
OVERRIDE options. The WSOs switch must be in HOT MIC to enable ground crew
transmission.

#### Amplifier Select Knob

The three position Amplifier Select Knob determines which amplification channel
is used: B/U for the backup, NORM for the normal amplifier, and EMER for a
parallel function, should both amplifiers in a cockpit fail. In EMER mode, only
audio from the other cockpit would be heard, and the volume control would be
managed by that cockpit.

#### Intercom Microphone Switch

The microphone switch for the Intercom System is the aft position on the inboard
throttle grip in both cockpits. When using the intercom, all audio sans the
pullup tone, stall warning, voice warning, and ECM are reduced.

### UHF Radio

The UHF Radio provides voice and Automatic Direction Finding (ADF) capabilities
to the F-4E. The radio can receive and transmit on 3500 manually selected
frequencies, 18 preset channels, or on the standard 243.00 MHz guard channel.
The aux receiver covers an additional 20 preset channels or guard. Two blade
antennas, one upper and one lower, as well as an ADF antenna, are provided. Once
the antenna mode is set for the primary channel, the aux receives from the other
antenna.

#### Comm Control Panel

Two Comm Control Panels are installed, found on the right console in the front
cockpit, and on the left console in the rear cockpit. These provide management
of the radio in either seat, with selectable priority.

#### Comm Command Button and Light

Control authority of the UHF radio is set by the COMM CMD button. A green light
illuminates in the cockpit with control next to the button. Either cockpit can
take control, or if already in control, press the button to provide control of
the radio to the other seat.

#### UHF Volume Control Thumbwheel

Sets the listenable volume for the UHF radio for the given crew-member.

### KY-28 Speech Security Unit

#### Speech Security Unit KY-28

The UHF communication system is capable of providing either conventional or
crypto voice transmission and reception. Both UHF and intercom systems can be
used in combination with the KY-28 Speech Security Unit, if so desired in a
tactical or hostile environment. The KY-28 can either cipher outgoing voice
transmissions or decipher received voice transmissions, however these functions
cannot be performed simultaneously. The crew can choose between plain or cipher
mode of operation. In the cipher mode operation the KY-28 converts voice inputs
through the microphone into crypto transmissions and deciphers crypto replies
that are being received to the crews headsets. In the plain mode operation the
UHF functions as a conventional voice transceiver.

#### KY-28 Controls and Indicators

![KY28Mode](img/KY28Mode.png)

The KY-28 is controlled by the KY-28 control panel and respectively the
conventional UHF or Intercom controls. Both front and rear cockpit instrument
panels display mode lights for either mode. If the mode light P is illuminated
the KY-28 and UHF/Intercom is operated in plain mode. If the mode light C is
illuminated the KY-28 and UHF/intercom is operated in the cipher mode.

#### KY-28 Control Panel

![wso_ky_28](img/wso_ky_28.png)

The KY-28 control panel is in the rear cockpit. It has a power knob, a mode
switch and a code zeroize button. The power knob provides power to the KY-28 and
can be set to either OFF, ON or RLY (relay). The KY-28 is not powered in the OFF
position. It is powered in the ON and RLY positions. If a direct communication
between KY units is desired, the ON position is to be selected. RLY would
provide the ability to use the KY-28 as a retransmission facility, which is not
modeled in DCS. The mode switch can be set to either P (plain) or C (cipher)
operating modes. To change modes the switch has to be pulled outwards. If the
KY-28 is powered and the mode switch is set to the C position, the UHF
transmitter is automatically selected for front cockpit transmissions. Pressing
the zeroize button neutralizes the preset code in the KY-28. The zeroize button
is guarded and should only be used in emergencies or after aircraft shutdown if
required. As the code can only be set on the ground, pressing the zeroize button
during flight makes the cipher mode inoperable for the crew for the remainder of
the flight.

Note: To permit conventional UHF communications the mode must be set to P
(plain) even if the KY-28 power knob is in the OFF position. If the mode is set
to C (cipher), conventional UHF communication is inhibited in both the front and
rear cockpit. An exception to this is transmission and reception on guard or aux
receivers, as these are not affected by the cipher mode.

#### KY-28 Modes of Operation

All transmitted and received signals are routed through the KY-28 unit. When the
KY-28 mode is set to P (plain), the UHF transceiver operates in the conventional
voice manner, whether the KY-28 is powered or not.

To operate the UHF transceiver in the KY-28s C (cipher) mode, the KY-28 has to
be powered. When operating in the cipher mode, the KY-28 unit functions in
either standby, receive, or transmit.

All KY-28 units remain in the STANDBY condition until either the microphone
button is actuated or a sync preamble is received. Once transmission or
reception of the crypto message has been completed the KY-28 automatically
reverts to the standby condition. While the KY-28 is in the standby condition
the radio equipment also functions as a traditional receiver as all incoming
non-crypto transmissions are passed directly to the headsets.

The unit switches to the cipher RECEIVE condition whenever a sync preamble is
received. The sync preamble is generated by other KY-8, KY-28 or KY-38 units
when the transmitting stations operator actuates the microphone button. The sync
preamble ensures that all units in the network are in the cipher receive
condition. The enciphered message is received immediately after the sync
preamble signal and the message is decoded by the KY-28 and passed to the
aircrew headsets in the form of plain language.

When the UHF microphone button is set to the UHF position, the KY-28 switches to
the TRANSMIT condition. The sync preamble signal is transmitted to all receiving
KY stations to switch to the cipher receive condition. After actuating the
microphone button, a brief tone is heard in the aircrew headsets. The tone
signal indicates that the sync preamble signal has been completed and
transmitted, after which the KY-28 is ready to transmit the crews voice input.
When the mic button is released again, the KY-28 reverts to the standby
condition. The WSO must select UHF communications with the radio selector switch
to transmit ciphered messages. The UHF transmitter is automatically selected for
front cockpit transmissions if the KY-28 is operated in mode C.

Note: With the C (cipher) mode selected, the transmit condition overrides the
cipher receive condition. Hence during cipher receive operation the UHF
microphone button should not be actuated until the incoming message has been
completed.

#### KY-28 Operation

Prelaunch

1. Before applying power to the aircraft the KY-28 power knob should be in the
   OFF position and the mode switch set to P (plain).
2. Determine that a proper code has been set by personnel qualified in voice
   security equipment. In DCS and in combination with SRS (Simple Radio) this is
   done through the ground crew communication menu in the DCS communications
   menu.
3. UHF radio - ON.
4. Mode switch - P.
5. Power knob - ON.
6. If a ground test of equipment is desired, establish two-way, plain-text radio
   communications on the plain-voice radio with a suitable remote station and
   request an equipment check. (In DCS another player is needed)
7. Mode switch - C.
8. The KY-28 will perform an automatic alarm check when the mode switch is set
   to C and the power knob is set to On. The check will continue for about 2
   seconds after power is applied. During this time a steady, unbroken 1200 Hz
   tone is heard in the headsets. Upon successful completion of the check, the
   1200 Hz tone is interrupted at a 2.3 Hz rate.
9. Momentarily position the microphone button to UHF to clear the interrupted
   tone. When the microphone button is released, the KY-28 reverts to the
   standby condition and is ready for either transmission or reception. If the
   until fails to pass the alarm check, the steady 1200 Hz tone continues and
   further cipher operation is inhibited.
10. Note: If the KY-28 fails the alarm check, the power knob must be set to OFF
    and the mode switch to P (plain) to enable conventional UHF communications.
11. To transmit ciphered messages, position the microphone button to UHF and
    wait until a momentary tone is heard before voice input. With the power knob
    set to ON, the momentary tone is delayed 0.5 seconds after pressing the
    microphone button. During this time an encryption check is performed and the
    sync preamble is transmitted to receiving stations. If the encryption check
    fails, a 1200 Hz tone interrupted at a 2.3 Hz rate is presented in the
    headsets and cipher transmission is not possible. If the encryption check
    succeeds, a momentary tone is heard in the headsets.
12. After the momentary tone is heard, establish two-way cipher radio
    communications with a cooperating station and check for readability and
    signal strength and/or transmit your message. Upon releasing the microphone
    button the KY-28 will return into the standby condition. Simultaneous
    transmission by two or more stations on the same frequency is not possible
    and may result in garbled messages or loss of synchronization.
13. Resume normal, non-crypto communications if desired at any time by setting
    the mode switch to P (plain) again.
14. Note: The above procedures may be used to perform an in-flight check of the
    equipment.
15. Postlaunch
16. The speech security equipment shall be operated as briefed.
17. Warning: If ZEROIZE is pressed during flight, ciphered communication is not
    possible. The code can only be reset (or changed) through the ground crew
    communications menu after landing.
18. After Landing
19. Zeroize as briefed.
20. Power switch - OFF.

## Lighting, Emergency, and Utility Systems

### Lighting Equipment

#### Exterior Lighting

![ext_lights](img/ext_lights.png)

Exterior lights on the F-4E include position lights found on the wings and tail,
join-up lights on the wings, fuselage lights, the anti collision light, and the
inflight refueling receptacle light; the control for these are found on the
right console. Additional in-flight lighting is provided by the formation
lights, which have a separate set of controls above the right console. Further
lighting is available for landing and taxi when the gear are lowered, and the
controls for these are found on the left sub-panel.

#### Position and Join-Up Lights

![pos_lights](img/pos_lights.png)

The wing and join-up lights are controlled by a single switch, with options for
OFF, DIM, and BRT. These lights do not have a flash function. The tail light is
controlled by the Flasher Switch in STEADY or FLASH position.

#### Anti-Collision and Fuselage Lights

![fus_light_top](img/fus_light_top.png)
![fus_light_bottom](img/fus_light_bottom.png)

Three white anti-collision lights are found behind the rear cockpit canopy, and
one below each of the engine intakes.

![anti_col_light](img/anti_col_light.png)

A red anti-collision light is found on the vertical stabilizer.

These are all controlled by the three position FUS switch, which can be set to
OFF, DIM, and BRT. The red light on the stabilizer only illuminates when this
switch is selected to BRT. The fuselage lights only function with the Flasher
Switch in STEADY or FLASH, and cycle when in the latter setting.

#### Landing and Taxi Lights

The landing and taxi lights are found on the nose gear door, and only illuminate
when the gear are in the down position.

#### IFR Receptacle Lights

To assist operators with boom alignment, lights illuminating the IFR receptacle
will power on when it is raised by placing the Air Refuel Switch into EXTEND.

#### Formation Lights

![formation_lights](img/formation_lights.png)

Electroluminescent formation lighting is found along the fuselage, wing tips,
and vertical stabilizer. These are activated using the control panel above the
right console, and have options for ON, OFF, and MOM (for momentary).

#### Interior Lighting

Lighting for instruments and controls, as well as a white utility lamp and red
floodlights are found in both cockpits. Barring the utility lamp and floodlight
controls (which are found on their respective lamps), all cockpit lighting
controls are found on the Flight Instrument Lights Control panel in each
cockpit. The sole difference between the two control panels is the intensity
control for the Warning Control knob in the front cockpit, which controls
brightness for all warning lights in both cockpits.

### Emergency Systems

#### Warning and Indicator Lights

#### Telelight Panel

The majority of cockpit warning lamps are found on the telelight panel on the
right sub-panel in the front cockpit. A list of them follows:

#### Master Caution

Found in the front cockpit, the MASTER CAUTION provides the pilot with an
up-front warning of potential hazard to the aircraft. The MASTER CAUTION
illuminates concurrently with most warning lamps on the telelight panel and the
generator indicators; warnings that do not set off MASTER CAUTION are noted in
the Telelight Panel list.

MASTER CAUTION can be deactivated by the pilot pressing the reset button on the
right console. However, it is important to note that pressing MASTER CAUTION
does not clear a warning on the telelight panel; instead, the warning will
remain until rectified. Should a second event occur in a system already giving a
telelight warning, MASTER CAUTION will not illuminate a second time.

#### Warning Light Test Circuit

Confirmation of bulb function can be performed using the Warning Test Light
Circuit found on the interior light control panel in both cockpits. These do not
perform a function text for the individual warning systems, only confirm that
the lights will illuminate.

#### Engine Fire and Overheat Detector System

On the right upper instrument panel in the front cockpit are four warning lamps-
two FIRE and two OVRHEAT lights, one for each side. Should a fire be detected in
an engine compartment, the applicable FIRE lap will illuminate. Overheat
detectors are mounted at the rear of the fuselage adjacent to the engine
nozzles, and illuminate the respective OVRHEAT lamp should temperatures become
dangerous to the aircraft.

#### Fire Test Button

When pressed, this button tests for functionality of the FIRE and OVRHT lamps.
Can also be used in conjunction with the Warning Lights Test switch to confirm
detection and continuity performance of the fire and overhead warning systems.
Holding the Warning Lights Test switch in the WARN TEST position, then
simultaneously pressing and releasing the Fire Test Button performs the test.
Proper system function is confirmed with the four FIRE and OVRHT lamps off while
the Fire Test Button is pressed, then illuminating when it is released.

#### Eject Light

In the event of loss of intercom power, the pilot can warn the WSO to prepare
for ejection by pressing the EJECT switch found on the left canopy sill forward
of the flap switch. This illuminates a pair of warning lamps found on the rear
cockpit indicator panel.

### Ejection Seats

The Phantom II uses the Martin Baker Mk. H-7 ejection seat in both positions for
safe aircrew extraction in the event of airframe loss. Triggering ejection using
the face curtain or lower ejection handles fires the seat mounted initiator that
jettisons the canopy. Once the canopy is clear of the airframe, the ejection gun
primary charge fires, unlatching the seat from the cockpit and initiating seat
climbout. As the seat rises, restraints on the legs pull them back for clearance
and the drogue timer is set. At the appropriate height, a lanyard attaching the
rocket motor initiator to the airframe trips the firing pin for the main rocket
engine to clear the aircraft. The previously set drogue gun fires at this time,
deploying a pair of small chutes to stabilize the seat in attitude and initiate
deceleration.

Once the seat has reached a pre-set barometric altitude between 11,500 and
14,500 feet, or momentarily after stabilization if lower, scissor mechanisms
release the crew-member with the survival kit-containing seat pan from the
ejection frame and deploys the main chute. In the event of ejection below the
barostat altitude, the WSO chute is fully deployed at 5 seconds after ejection
initiation, and the pilot one second later.

#### Command Selector Valve Handle

To the left and above the rear cockpit instrument handle is the Command Selector
Valve Handle. This handle determines the sequence by an ejection initiated from
the rear seat- both seats, or the rear seat only. The handle is marked PLT EJECT
PULL TURN. When the handle is oriented vertically, single seat ejection is
selected; to set dual seat ejection, the handle is rotated clockwise to the
horizontal.

All ejections initiated from the front seat are dual ejections.

### Jettison System

The majority of stores carried by the F-4 can be jettisoned from the aircraft
while in flight and with the landing gear stowed and doors closed. Jettison does
not remove pylons, and the AIM-9 Sidewinder is non-jettisonable.

#### External Stores Emergency Release Button

Found on the front left cockpit sub-panel, the External Stores Emergency
Release, also known as the panic button, will release all air to ground
munitions, external tanks, and any pods subject to jettison. Sparrow and
Sidewinder missiles, along with all pylons, will remain in place. Pushing the
button will show the yellow paint inside its recess to confirm its actuation.
Performing the actuation disengages external fuel tank transfer automatically,
permitting proper flow of internal wing tanks without further pilot action. The
button is active so long as the aircraft gear is up, or, in the event of a
forward gear handle failure, so long as the rear gear handle remains IN, and
weight is off wheels.

#### Selective Jettison

Wing and centerline stores can be jettisoned independently using the Jettison
Knob in the STORES position, selecting the desired Station Select Buttons to
release, and pressing PUSH TO JET. Any pylon or missile launcher at the station
will remain in place, but stores- including MERs and TERs, will be released.

#### AIM-7 Jettison

AIM-7 Sparrow missiles are released individually using the L/R FWD or L/R AFT
positions on the Jettison Knob, then pressing PUSH TO JETT.

#### AGM-65 Jettison

To release AGM-65 missiles, choose TV or ARM on the Weapon Select Knob, press
the desired Station Select Button(s), select L WING or R WING for the Jettison
Knob, and press PUSH TO JETT. One missile is released per press; once desired
rounds are removed from one wing, select the other wing with the Jettison Knob
and repeat the PUSH TO JETT cycle.

### Oxygen System

Aircrew breathing oxygen is provided with a 10-liter liquid oxygen bottle. A
regulator panel is found on the left side in each cockpit- on the console in the
front cockpit, and the left sub-panel in the rear. Flow is initiated in each
cockpit using the Supply Lever found on the regulator panel. Oxygen flow is
confirmed using the Flow Indicator window, which alternates from black to white
for each breath. Supply pressure and remaining volume is confirmed using the
Oxygen Pressure and Oxygen Quantity gauges found on both regulator panels.

### Canopies

The canopies are controlled independently between the two cockpits; handles for
standard opening and closing are found on the right side of each cockpit,
whereas the yellow and black emergency jettison handle is found on the left in
the same relative position. To open normally, the right side handle is pulled to
the aft position; closing is performed by pushing it forward. Canopy jettison is
initiated by pulling the emergency handle aft.

### Air Refueling System

For air to air refueling, the F-4E uses a receptacle system compatible with high
pressure USAF-style boom refueling. With this system, fuel can be delivered to
the Phantom at a rate of up to 3900 lbs per minute. Fuel received is delivered
into fuselage cell 2, then equalized through the rest of the aircraft cells,
wing tanks, and, if installed and selected, external tanks.

#### Air Refuel Switch

Preparation for air refueling is performed by toggling the Air Refuel Switch to
EXTEND; doing so extends the receptacle, illuminates the receptacle visual
lamps, depressurizes the fuel cells, activates the transfer pumps to
redistribute received fuel for CG maintenance, and activates the air refuel
READY lamp. RETRACT is used to lower the receptacle and return pressurization
and normal function to the tanks.

If, during AAR, the boom disconnects and the DISENGAGED light illuminates, this
switch has to be flipped to RETRACT and back to EXTEND to reset the system and
allow the boom to connect again.

#### Refuel Selection Switch

The two-position Refuel Selection Switch provides options for two modes of
refueling: internal fuselage and internal wing tanks (INT ONLY), and ALL TANKS,
used to include external tanks in the refueling operation.

#### Ready Light

With the receptacle extended and tanks depressurized, the READY lamp illuminates
to notify the pilot refueling can begin. The lamp will turn off when the boom is
connected to the receptacle, or the receptacle is lowered by the RETRACT command
on the Air Refuel Switch.

#### Disengaged Light

Should the boom separate from the receptacle, the DISENGAGED lamp will
illuminate. In the event of a DISENGAGED signal, the system must be reset to
continue refueling.

#### Air Refueling Release Button

On the front seat control stick is the Air Refueling Release Button. Its primary
purpose is to release the receptacle from the boom in the event of a manual
refueling cycle (one in which the boom operator cannot force a disconnect
remotely), or perform a disengagement on demand based on flight conditions or
emergency situation. Pressing the ARRB will disengage the boom, and illuminate
the DISENGAGED lamp.

#### AIR REFUEL RECPT Circuit Breaker

In the event of a DISENGAGED situation during air refueling, the system is reset
using the AIR REFUEL RECPT circuit breaker, found on the No 2 circuit breaker
panel in the rear cockpit- right side, fourth column, top breaker.

#### External Tanks Full Lights

![AARLights](img/AARLights.png)

Three indicators- L.H. FULL, CTR. FULL, and R.H. FULL (Left Hand, Center, Right
Hand) lamps provide confirmation that the external tanks have been filled during
the air refueling process. The lamps will remain lit until the air refueling
receptacle retracted.

### Windshield Rain Removal

To clear precipitation, placing the Rain Removal Switch to ON will direct bleed
air from the air conditioning system to an external vent below the windshield,
breaking up rain water into smaller drops and blowing them off of the
windshield. The system does increase the temperature of the windscreen, and may
cause a WINDSHIELD TEMP HI lamp along with the MASTER CAUTION to illuminate. In
this situation, the temperature is nearing that of optical distortion, and must
be set to OFF immediately.

Due to high Mach frictional heating of the windscreen, the WINDSHIELD TEMP HI
lamp can also illuminate with the system off; in that event, the warning can be
disregarded.

## Weapons and Employment Systems

### Multiple Weapons System

The Multiple Weapons System is designed to provide a single point of management
for all stores deliverable by the F-4 with regards to arming, pylon activation,
delivery mode, and selective jettison. While specific weapons may have
additional controls elsewhere in the cockpit on a case by case basis, all of the
noted functions are driven by this panel on the left forward console in the
front cockpit.

#### Nose/Tail ARM Switch

Beginning from the top of the panel, the four way Nose/Tail ARM switch selects
the solenoids for arming wire capture on MERs and TERs, which then arm the fuzes
at the point of release. Additionally, the switch position can also dictate
in-flight high/low drag release mode for retarded bombs such as the Mk 82
Snakeye.

| Name      | Description                                                                       |
| --------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| SAFE      | No arming solenoids activate; bombs release without fuzing enabled.               |
| NOSE      | Forward and center position solenoids activate to hold arming lanyards.           |
| TAIL      | Aft position solenoids activate to hold arming lanyards.                          |
| NOSE/TAIL | Forward, center, and aft position solenoids all activate to hold arming lanyards. |

MER-10 and TER-9 racks include an automatic stepper mode function to
automatically bypass stations that have already released munitions. To set this
function, when the BOMBS mode of the Weapon Select Knob is chosen, the Nose/Tail
switch must be in the NOSE or the NOSE & TAIL position for release signals to be
delivered through installed MERs and TERs and bypass empty positions; if the
system is set in TAIL, an additional release pulse(s) must be applied using the
bomb switch to cycle through the empty stations. Usage of the MER-10A and TER-9A
circumvent this requirement.

RKTS and DISP bypass empty stations automatically.

#### Station Select Buttons

#### Mode Selection - Delivery Mode Knob

Release mode is set using the Delivery Mode Knob. Values to the left of OFF
employ the AN/AJB-7 Attitude Reference and Combing Computer Set (ARBCS), whereas
values to the right of DIRECT employ the Weapon Release Computer Set (WRCS).
DIRECT is the manual release mode. TGT FIND functions as a navigational mode,
and cannot provide a weapon release signal to the fire control, thus can be
considered in practice a "safe" position.

The values, clockwise from the left, are as follows:

| Name     | Description                            | System |
| -------- | -------------------------------------- | ------ |
| INST O/S | Instantaneous Over the Shoulder        | ARBCS  |
| LOFT     | Loft                                   | ARBCS  |
| O/S      | (Timed) Over the Shoulder              | ARBCS  |
| T LAD    | Timed LADD (Low Angle Drogue Delivery) | ARBCS  |
| TL       | Timed Level                            | ARBCS  |
| OFF      | Off                                    |        |
| DIRECT   | Manual                                 |        |
| TGT FIND | Target Find (Navigation only)          | WRCS   |
| DT       | Dive Toss                              | WRCS   |
| DL       | Dive Laydown                           | WRCS   |
| L        | Laydown                                | WRCS   |
| OFFSET   | Offset Bomb                            | WRCS   |
| AGM-45   | AGM-45 Delivery                        | WRCS   |

#### Weapon Selector Knob

The Weapon Selector Knob is used to designate the type of weapon to be used

| Name        | Description                                                               |
| ----------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| RKTS & DISP | Rockets and dispensers. Arms AWRU release circuitry.                      |
| ARM         | AGM-45 Shrike                                                             |
| TV          | AGM-65 Maverick and other EO guided weapons.                              |
| C           | Open/unused. May be utilized as an OFF selection.                         |
| B           | Same function as AIR-TO-AIR button in rear cockpit.                       |
| A           | Munitions with internally-set intervalometers (CBUs or spray containers). |
| AGM 12      | AGM-12 Bullpup.                                                           |
| BOMBS       | Bombs. Arms AWRU release circuitry.                                       |

#### Centerline Tank Aboard Light

The forward AIM-7 missiles can be inhibited from launch under certain centerline
conditions due to possible separation issues or chance of igniting the contents
of the centerline position. The CL tank light will illuminate if such a possible
condition exists. The conditions that can cause this are as follows:

1. Fuel Tank or MER; the forward Sparrows cannot be launched. The CL tank light
   will shut off if the tank or MER is jettisoned, allowing launch or jettison.

2. BRU-5/A with single bomb; the CL tank light will illuminate. Forward position
   Sparrows can be launched or jettisoned, however, attention should be paid to
   eliminate lateral roll movements until the launched weapon is clear.

3. Aero-27/A with Centerline Arming Unit. The CL tank light will illuminate,
   however the forward position AIM-7s cannot be jettisoned or released until
   this is removed post-flight.

#### Interlock Switch

The fire control system provides an inhibitor option for AIM-7 launches to
confirm valid parameters are met, and is accessed with the INTLK switch. With IN
selected, the missile will not release upon trigger down should any of the
following not be the case:

1. The IN RANGE lamp illuminated
2. The target aim dot within the ASE (Allowable Steering Error) circle
3. The radar knob is not in VI mode

With the INTLK switch in OUT, the AIM-7 can be launched at any time, no matter
the condition of the current parameters against the target.

The INTLK switch provides no function for AIM-9 launch.

### Aircraft Weapons Release Unit (AWRU)

Used in the BOMBS and RKTS & DISP weapon modes, the AWRU provides interval and
quantity controls for munition delivery. The AWRU has both a manual and
automatic mode, and the resulting function is accessed with the appropriate
settings.

The Interval Knob contains 14 values, providing base interval timing of release
pulses while the bomb release button is held from 1/20th of a second (.05) to 1
second. This value can have a 10x multiplier applied to it using the INTRVL
Switch. In the NORM mode of the INTRVL switch, the release will apply as on the
Interval Knob, whereas when selected to x10, the 10x multiplier will apply- for
example, 1 second in NORM would become an interval of 10 seconds in x10 mode.

The Quantity Knob sets the total number of munitions dropped during a bomb
release hold, and applies the manual or automatic release functions based on the
value selected.

#### Single-Manual: 1

In the 1 position, the AWRU is placed into manual mode. One munition will be
dropped on each bomb release press, with releases across multiple selected
stations dropping in a left-right-left pattern. The bomb release button must be
released, then pressed a subsequent time, to release another round.

#### Single-Ripple: 2-18

In numerical positions 2-18, up to the total number of selected munitions will
be dropped according to the Interval setting. As an example, with a QTY of 6 and
an interval of .20, six bombs will be dropped, one every 2/10ths of a second
from the press of the bomb release button. The sequence will reset upon button
release, allowing subsequent ripples of the same quantity to be dropped.

#### Single-Continuous: C

In position C, the quantity of weapons is dictated by how long the bomb release
button is held. The ripple will apply the set interval, releasing one munition
each pulse, until the bomb button is released.

#### Pairs-Manual: P

Position P places the AWRU into pairs mode. With multiple stations selected,
each time the bomb button is pressed, a weapon will be released from each
station.

#### Salvo: S

In the S position, the AWRU enters into salvo mode, functioning like
Pairs-Manual with single rounds released from each station, but using the set
interval value to release multiple salvos until the bomb button is released.

### Weapon Release Computer Set (WRCS)

Provision for the F-4E to perform accurate level and dive munition delivery is
provided by the AN/ASQ-91 WRCS. The WRCS inputs are set with the associated
panels in the cockpits, and these commands, along with INS data and radar target
ranging, are used by the ballistic computer to provide the release signal.

#### Target Range Controls

The Computer Control Panel found in the rear cocpit has three TARGET entry
controls, two RELEASE entries, and a bomb DRAG COEFFICIENT entry setting, as
well as a BIT control knob for system function check. Target entry is relative
to the predetermined IP.

The upper range control input is for North/South, and selection of relative
bearing is noted by the N or S prefix at the start.

The middle range control input is for East/West, and like the previous, the E or
W prefix on the range sets the relative bearing direction.

The final ALT RANGE entry is for target altitude- whether the target or RIP
(Radar Identification Point) elevation as MSL, or the target/RIP's pressure
altitude.

Entries for North/South and East/West are in 100 foot increments, and a maximum
value of up to 99,900 feet may be entered for these distances. The ALT RANGE
entry has a maximum of 24,900 in 100 foot increments. Note that the WRCS can be
damaged if the ALT RANGE entry is greater than the aircraft's current MSL (x100)
in TGT FIND and OFFSET BOMB modes.

#### Release Range Control

The Release Range control is used to manually set bomb range in tens of feet,
and is accessible in the Laydown, Dive Laydown, and Offset Bombing modes. The
maximum setting is 9990 feet (999x10), and when used in a WRCS/AJB-7 integrated
delivery, the actual range can be as high as 99,900'.

The Rg control should not be set to the same value as the target range control.
Otherwise, the bomb rack delay may may relase late, or not at all.

#### Release Advance Control

Operative in all WRCS and WRCS/LABS integrated motes, the Release Advance
Control works in conjunction with the AWRU to advance the release signal in
milliseconds. Whereas the AWRU Intervalometer setting triggers the release pulse
sequence from the moment the bomb release button is pressed, when the Release
Advance Control is applied in a WRCS driven delivery, the specific bomb location
in a multiple ripple sequence can be calculated in advance, allowing the most
effective spread possible across a given target.

As an example, an AWRU single-ripple quantity release of 4 is selected with an
interval of 120 miliseconds. To place the third bomb in the ripple on target,
the following equation is used:

\\[ RA = I_R \cdot (N_{Tgt} - 1) \\]

where

- \\( RA \\) = Release Advance Setting, milliseconds
- \\( I_R \\) = ARWU Release Intervalometer setting, milliseconds
- \\( T\_{Tgt} \\) = Impact Sequence number of bomb desired on target

\\[ RA = 120 \cdot (3 - 1) \\]

Thus, for this release, we would set the value of RA to 240 msec. This would
produce a spread of two bombs ahead of target, one on the calculated target
point, and one behind.

The maximum setting for the Release Advance Control is 999 milliseconds.

#### Drag Coefficient Control

Used only in the Dive Toss Mode, this entry is a bias factor prepared for the
ballistic computer to compensate for actual bomb trajectory. The maximum setting
for this value is 9.99.

##### Ballistic Computer

The ballistic computer is not directly accessed by the flight crew, but instead
pre-set based on the configured loadout by the ground crew to add the necessary
ejection bias factors. The computer uses these pre-set bias factors in
conjunction with a coeficient setting for munition drag in the Dive Toss mode to
calculate accurate delivery.

#### WRCS Built-In-Test (BIT)

The BIT control is used to confirm go/no-go status of the WRCS. The BIT system
checks individual bomb modes individually, and effectivity of the given setting
is confirmed by selecting the desired mode, pushing the center of the knob PUSH
FOR BIT for five seconds, then pressing the FREEZE button in conjunction wih the
PUSH FOR BIT button. Confirmation of mode performance will be displayed as GO or
NO-GO. Should a mode be checked a subsequent time during a flight and a NO-GO
response is received, it can be disregarded.

#### Cursor Control Panel

The Cursor Control Panel provides the controls needed for TARGET FIND and OFFSET
bombing modes. The panel has two thumbwheels named ALONG TRACK and CROSS TRACK,
which is used in the MAP-PPI mode to position their respective cursors over the
Radar Identification Point (from this point denoted as RIP). The ALONG TRACK
control, which presents relative range to the RIP, also includes an internal
switch enabling the cursor instructions to be acknowledged by the WRCS ballistic
computer, and must therefore be the first applied command in the target
insertion sequence.

Once the ALONG TRACK (range hemisphere) and CROSS TRACK (vertical line) cursors
are aligned over the RIP, the FREEZE button is pressed to initiate WRCS ground
path tracking of the specified point. The button remains illuminated until the
RESET button is pressed or another bombing mode is selected.

With WRCS ground tracking initiated, the TARGET INSERT button is pressed for the
ALONG TRACK and CROSS TRACK cursors to shift from the RIP to the offset target.
Once selected, target steering information is provided from the WRCS to the
BDHI, ADI, HSI, and optical sight. In the AGM-45 missile mode, the AoA Indexers
will provide maneuver commands for level, dive, or climb requirements to align
for seeker acquisition. Further, unless the WRCS Tone switch is disabled on the
ARBCS panel, an audio tone will be triggered from the point of bomb release
button press until the first bomb releases from the aircraft; this function is
nominally for training purposes, as it can preclude other system audio volume.

#### Weapon Delivery Panel

The Weapon Delivery Panel permits the aircrew to use the WRCS TGT FIND functions
in LABS (ARBCS) modes- those found on the left side of the pilot's Delivery Mode
Knob.

The TGT FIND switch on the panel functions the same as the TGT FIND mode on the
Delivery Mode Knob. The Delivery Mode Knob overrides this switch in any mode
outside of TGT FIND, and should be set back to NORM. The HOLD position energizes
the target finding circuts in conjunction with any LABS or DIRECT mode the pilot
selects.

The RANGE Switch is functional in any WRCS mode requiring a Release Range
setting. The NORM position applies the noted x10 multiplier on the displayed
Release setting, whereas selecting x100 applies a multiplier of 100 to the
counter value.

The ACTIVATE Switch triggers the prerequisite activation signals to the LABS
circuits once the aircraft has passed within the Release Range. The switch
should only be placed in ON after target insert has been pressed and the ALONG
TRACK and CROSS TRACK cursors have transitioned to the target.

### Attitude Reference and Bombing Computer Set (ARBCS)

The AN/AJB-7 ARBCS is the automated release control system for time or
pitch-relative bombing. Interfacing wihth the Multiple Weapon Controls, Pedestal
Panel weapon settings, and bomb, laser guided, or the AGM-45, the system
releases the selected munition once the respective Bombing Timer or respective
Bomb Release Angle Computer pitch angle (gyro) target has been achieved.

The left side of the Delivery Mode Knob selects the ARBCS release modes. Both
LOFT and T LAD modes provide weapons release in a pull-up, with LOFT selecting a
4.0 G pullup schedule and weapon release on achieving a set gyro angle value,
whereas T LAD assumes a 3.5 G pullup schedule and release at the end of the
Bombing Timer setting. Necessary values for Low and High angle, as well as the
Bombing Timer are found on the provided tables.

#### Bomb Release Angle Computer

The Bomb Release Angle Computer provides entry of the necessary target pitch
angles for ARBCS bombing modes. The values of HIGH (70 to 179.9 degrees) and LOW
(0 to 89.9 degrees) are controlled using their respective entry knobs.
Internally, the computer contains the release switches, as well as the resolver
to transmit the target angle values to the ADI director pointers.

#### Bombing Timers

Timers for ARBCS bombing modes are available for PULLUP (0 to 60 seconds) and
RELEASE (0 to 30 seconds). Both can be set in increments of 0.1 second, with 0.1
second as the minimum setting. The reference windows do not count down during
the bomb run.

When the PULLUP timer is complete, required PULLUP signaling will initiate,
along with any ADI director programming to show proper flight path. RELEASE
timing is mode dependent, and will occur once PULLUP is complete, if required.

In LOFT and O/S modes, only PULLUP timing is activated, and a value must be set
to energize the ADI pullup flight path program.

In T LAD and TL, PULLUP and RELEASE are both activated, in sequence, and both
require a value entry- PULLUP to energize the flight path programming, and
RELEASE to generate the munition release signal.

In integrated LABS (ARBCS)/WRCS bombing, the above requirements are the same,
however the WRCS initiates the bomb run timing, rather than pressing the bomb
button. When the WRCS initiates timing, a audio tone is applied to signal timer
start.

#### ARBCS Indicators

During ARBCS weapons delivery, a number of indicators are available to confirm
run initiation and at what step of the given run the aircraft is in:

1. Upon run initiation (bomb button press/WRCS initiation) and PULLUP timer
   start, the Pullup light turns ON.

2. At PULLUP timer completion, the Pullup light turns OFF, the reticle light
   turns OFF, and a steady Pullup Tone (if switched ON) occurs.

3. As release pitch angle is attained, the Pullup light turns ON, the reticle
   light turns ON, and the Pullup Tone stops.

4. When the bomb button is released, Pullup light turns OFF.

This indication sequence can occur with the master arm in SAFE for training
purposes.

#### Gyro Fast Erect

Due to rapid maneuvering during a bombing run, gyro deviation can occur due to
fluid migration. While this deviation will resolve naturally at a rate of 1 to 2
degrees correction perminute over time, it can quickly be corrected by using the
FAST ERECT switch found in the front pilot cockpit on the left side console, at
a rate of 15 degrees per minute. This switch should not be held for more than 60
seconds, or damage can occur to the gyro.

### Pave Spike

![pave_spike_pod](img/pave_spike_pod.png)

The AN/AVQ-23 Pave Spike targeting pod is the successor of the AN/AVQ-10 Pave
Knife and predecessor of the AN/AVQ-26 Pave Tack pod. It entered service in 1974
and was replaced from 1982 to 1989 by the Pave Tack pod. It provides a slewable
TV image for spotting ground targets and can fire laser for determining range
information and to guide laser guided weapons.

![pave_spike_screen_example](img/pave_spike_screen_example.png)

The line of sight can be controlled by the WSO, using the Antenna Hand Control.
The camera image is displayed on the DSCG scope and can be viewed by both, the
Pilot and the WSO independently.

#### Targeting Pod

The system has an optical camera for daylight operation with one level of
optical zoom, for a wide and narrow (4x) field of view.

Limitations for the pods gimbals are

- Roll: -160 to +110 degrees
- Pitch: -160 to +15 degrees
- Yaw: -15 to +15 degrees

![pave_spike_roll_limit](img/pave_spike_roll_limit.png)
![pave_spike_elev_limit](img/pave_spike_elev_limit.png)

#### Symbology

The TV image mainly consists of a reticle. The reticle rotates clockwise to
indicate the pods current elevation. At a 90 degree rotation, the pod is looking
straight down. If the reticle is almost upside down, the pod reached its gimbal
limit for the elevation (160 degrees).

The wide field of view is indicated by a circle around the reticle.

On the left, the image displays two cues:

- Time To Go Cue (TTg)
- Release Cue (T0)

During weapon operation, TTg moves down until it intersects T0, indicating the
time to release.

![pave_spike_symbology](img/pave_spike_symbology.png)
![pave_spike_symbology_fov](img/pave_spike_symbology_fov.png)

The cues also indicate various situations related to laser operation.

| Indication    | T0                                    | TTG                                     |
| ------------- | ------------------------------------- | --------------------------------------- |
| not shown     | not in TRACK mode                     | not in TRACK mode                       |
| steady        | commanded to fire laser (full action) | firing laser, accepted range            |
| flashing fast | not commanded to fire laser           | not firing laser or target too far away |
| flashing slow |                                       | firing laser, but range rejected        |

#### Controls

The Pave Spike is mostly interacted with by the WSO, while the Pilot has
indicators assisting in keeping the pods line of sight within its limits.

The entire system, known as AN/ASQ-153 Electro-Optical Target Designator System,
consists of:

- Range Indicator (Pilot)
- Azimuth-Elevation Indicator (Pilot)
- Laser Coder Control (WSO)
- Target Designator Set Control (WSO)

While the display is shown on the DSCG screens in both cockpits.

![eotgt_pilot_overview](img/eotgt_pilot_overview.png)
![eotgt_wso_overview](img/eotgt_wso_overview.png)

#### Azimuth-Elevation Indicator

The Azimuth-Elevation Indicator is the main instrument for the pilot to assess
the pods current attitude in order to keep the line of sight within the
operational limits.

![EOLos](img/EOLos.png)

The needle shows the pods roll position from -160 (CW) to +110 (CCW) degrees.

Three flags indicate the elevation:

- green: -120 to -155 degrees
- yellow: -155 to -160 degrees
- red: -160 or beyond degrees

If the needle is kept within the green labelled range and neither the yellow or
red flag are shown, the view will not be obstructed by the pod or the aircraft.

#### Range Indicator

This panel provides the pilot with a readout of the slant range measured by the
Pave Spike (x100 ft).

![range_indicator](img/range_indicator.png)

When the Test-Button is pressed, the display shows 888, the knob underneath it
controls the brightness of the readout.

The Mode-Knob allows the pilot to select one of two weapon delivery modes
available with the pod:

- WRCS - Automatic Delivery
- ROR - Release on Range

In the SET position, the display shows the desired release range used in the ROR
mode. The knob below the readout can be used to adjust this range.

#### Laser Coder Control

The WSO can set the laser code used by the targeting pod by using the four small
push-buttons on this panel. Each press will advance the corresponding digit by
one. Once a code has been set, it can be transferred to the Pave Spike by
pressing the Enter-Button to the right.

![laser_coder_control](img/laser_coder_control.png)

The Laser Coder system starts validating the entered code, this process takes
about 5 seconds. If the NO-GO lamp is lit, the code is invalid.

Codes directly relate to lasers frequencies, resulting in them having to be
between 1111 and 1788 and not use digits 0 or 9 in order to be valid.

When power is applied to the system, it automatically initiates a transfer of
the currently set code.

#### Target Designator Control Set

This is the main panel to interact with the targeting pod.

![target_des_panel](img/target_des_panel.png)

From left to right, top to bottom, it provides the WSO with:

- Reticle Brightness Knob - change the reticle from black to green
- Az/El/Roll Boresight Knobs - adjust the boresight position of the pod within
  Â±2.5 degrees
- Stow Button - Stow or Unstow the pod
- Laser Ready Button - Arm or Disarm the laser
- Power On Button - Turn the pod on or off
- Currently selected BIT, with push button to advance the BIT
- Light Brightness Knob - adjust brightness of all lights on this panel (except
  the Overheat lamp)
- Reject/Override Button - Force the use of the laser slant range
- Acquisition Mode Switch - Select the Acquisition Mode (12-VIS, WRCS or 9-VIS)
- WRCS Out Button - Toggle WRCS integration with the pod
- GO/MALF Lamp - Indicates BIT results
- INS Out Button (and Overheat lamp) - Toggle INS integration with the pod

The lamps generally indicate the current status, while the push buttons can be
used as a manual command. For example, pressing the Laser Ready Button is not
enough for the laser to actually be ready. The lamp will only be lit if all
other conditions, such as a valid laser code being set, are met.

#### Antenna Hand Control

During Track mode, the WSO can manually slew and correct the pods line of sight
with the Antenna Hand Control, or Antenna Stick.

![pave_spike_antenna_hand_control](img/pave_spike_antenna_hand_control.png)

The Challenge Button is used to zoom in or out, while the 2-stage trigger is
used to switch between modes and fire the laser.

#### Electrics

The Pave Spike draws its power through 4 circuit breakers on the No. 4 CB Panel
(WSO, left wall). They forward current from the left main AC bus and the main DC
bus.

![pave_spike_cbs](img/pave_spike_cbs.png)

All panels of the system are powered directly through the pod, and hence will be
turned off if the Pave Spike targeting pod is not equipped.

It is not required to turn on the pod itself in order for power to be routed
through the pod to the panels.

#### INS integration

During normal operation, the pod is connected with the INS. This can be disabled
manually by pressing the INS OUT push button.

![ins_out_lamp](img/ins_out_lamp.png)

With INS disabled, the following functions are not available:

- Automatic target stabilization during Track-mode
- Roll-stabilization during 12-VIS Acquisition-mode
- Slant range computation
- WRCS integration

#### WRCS integration

During normal operation, the pod is connected with the WRCS. This can be
disabled manually by pressing the WRCS OUT push button.

![wrcs_out_lamp](img/wrcs_out_lamp.png)

Also, the WRCS is disabled automatically without INS integration, or if
currently not in DIRECT or TGT FIND weapon mode.

![pave_spike_weapon_sel](img/pave_spike_weapon_sel.png)

With WRCS disabled, the following functions are not available:

- WRCS Acquisition mode
- Memory mode
- WRCS Automatic Weapon Release

And some functions are degraded, but still available:

- Slant range computation
- Automatic target stabilization during Track-mode

#### Modes

Prior to being able to designate a target, one has to visually aquire the
general target area and put the LOS in the vicinity. This is done by using one
of three acquisition modes:

- 12-VIS
- 9-VIS
- WRCS

The modes can be selected by the WSO, using the Acquisition Mode Switch.

![acq_mode_switch](img/acq_mode_switch.png)

#### Visual modes

In 12-VIS and 9-VIS, the LOS is set to a fix position.

- 12-VIS: 0 degrees roll, -2 degrees elevation, looking slightly nose down
- 9-VIS: -90 degrees roll (CW), -90 degrees elevation (down), looking left

12-VIS can be a great way to find targets of opportunity, as it allows the pilot
to put a target directly on the nose. The position also corresponds to the caged
HUD reticle. Additionally, if the INS is integrated with the pod, 12-VIS is
roll-stabilized.

The use of 9-VIS is very limited. It is intended to aid in acquiring a target
while observing an area in a turn. The target has to be put on the extension of
the left wing. However, in practice it is very difficult to maintain a turn in
such an attitude.

#### WRCS mode

The main mode to acquire targets is the WRCS mode, in which the LOS is set to
the current WRCS target. This usually corresponds to the cursor on the radar
screen,but can also be set manually by the WSO. This enables the crew to spot a
target, or general target area, by using the radar or entering known coordinates
and then slewing the pod to this destination. If no specific target has been
inserted, the WRCS usually defaults to the aircraft position, resulting in the
pod looking straight down.

The WRCS mode automatically falls back to the 12-VIS mode in case the WRCS
integration is deactivated.

#### Track mode

Once the target, or general target area, has been found using the acquisition
modes, the WSO can enter Track-mode by pressing the trigger on the Antenna Hand
Control to either Half or Full Action.

In this mode, the Antenna Stick can be moved to slew the pod LOS. Operating the
laser is only available in this mode, and can be activated by pressing the
trigger on the Antenna Stick to Full Action.

Track mode is indicated by the T0 and TTG cues becoming visible on the display.
They also indicate the status during laser operation.

If the INS is integrated with the pod, the image will automatically be space
stabilized on the computed target position. Be aware that the stabilization is
rudimentary and needs constant correction with the stick for the target to be
kept centered.

The stabilization is mostly based on the measured slant range. Accurate slant
range can be obtained by firing the laser. Alternatively, it is computed based
on the aircraft barometric altitude and the target altitude, which can be set by
the WSO on the WRCS panel.

![pave_spike_wrcs_target_alt](img/pave_spike_wrcs_target_alt.png)

Without a WRCS integration, a target altitude of 0 is assumed, degrading the
stabilization.

Note that the pod is not capable of computing a slant range for targets above
the own aircraft altitude (for example when attacking up-hill). Since that is
measured using the barometric altitude, depending on the pressure-setting, this
can lead to erratic behavior during hot days when flying low. Problematic
situations like this were commonly referred to as Idiot mode, as the tracking
system started to behave very odd and it was very difficult to restore proper
behavior. The crew often had to deactivate the INS integration temporarily in
order to disable the automatic tracking.

#### Memory Mode

Whenever a target-insert signal is send, the system activates the Memory-mode,
provided it is currently in Track-mode and the WRCS integration is active.

In this mode, the line of sight is slaved to the current WRCS target, even if it
is outside of the pods gimbal limits and cannot be displayed currently. The mode
acts very similar to the WRCS-Acquisition mode.

The memory mode has to be left explicitly again, by either pressing half or full
action on the Antenna Stick.

#### Target Insert

A target-insert signal is usually initiated by the WSO pressing the
target-insert button.

![wrcs_target_insert_button](img/wrcs_target_insert_button.png)

However, when the pod is currently in Track-mode and is maneuvered outside of
its gimbal limits, it will automatically initiate a target-insert signal and
send its current target position to the WRCS. Note that, if the laser is
currently firing, it will automatically be stopped when hitting a limit.

This signal then also causes the pod to enter Memory-mode, in which case it will
continue to follow the position now memorized by the WRCS.

Additionally, the signal will also be send if the pod is deselected, i.e.

- Video Select Switch - Weapon, or
- WSO DSCG Mode - not TV (for example switching to Radar)

#### Laser System

The laser can only be operated in the Track-mode and serves two purposes:

- Guiding laser guided weapons on a target,
- and accurate slant range measurement.

Slant range is, besides weapon impact calculations, used for the automatic
target stablization in Track-mode. If not measured with the laser, it is
computed based on inaccurate INS and WRCS data, resulting in a degradation of
the system.

The laser can be used when the LASER READY lamp is illuminated.

![laser_ready_lamp](img/laser_ready_lamp.png)

To setup the laser, a valid code has to first be entered on the Laser Coder
Control panel and transferred to the pod by pressing the Enter-Button. Make sure
that the NO GO light is not illuminated.

![laser_coder_control](img/laser_coder_control.png)

The LASER READY push button has to be pushed in for the laser to be armed.

Additionally, the laser is guarded by the nose gear position, which has to be
fully retracted to prevent accidental use on the ground.

Once ready, the laser is fired during track mode by pressing full action on the
Antenna Stick. The status of the laser operation is indicated by the cues on the
display being steady or flashing.

| Indication    | T0                                    | TTG                                     |
| ------------- | ------------------------------------- | --------------------------------------- |
| not shown     | not in TRACK mode                     | not in TRACK mode                       |
| steady        | commanded to fire laser (full action) | firing laser, accepted range            |
| flashing fast | not commanded to fire laser           | not firing laser or target too far away |
| flashing slow |                                       | firing laser, but range rejected        |

The T0 cue indicates intention to fire the laser, while the TTG cue represents
the outcome of the laser usage.

The slant range measured by the laser is compared to the slant range computed
based on INS and WRCS data. If it is not within Â±20% percent of that value, it
is rejected. This is indicated by TTG flashing slow.

The system can be forced to use the laser range regardless, by pressing the
Reject/Override Button.

![reject_override_button](img/reject_override_button.png)

In practice, laser measured range is much more accurate than the slant range
computed by the system. Hence, pilots developed a habit of always hitting the
button whenever they fired the laser.

#### Weapon Release Modes

The pod offers two additional weapon release modes:

- WRCS Auto Mode
- ROR (Release on Range)

#### Auto Mode

The main method of weapon delivery with the pod is the WRCS automatic release
mode.

The WRCS has to be integrated with the pod for it to be available, and the pilot
must select TGT FIND as delivery mode, as well as WRCS on the range indicator.

![pave_spike_weapon_sel_tgt_find](img/pave_spike_weapon_sel_tgt_find.png)
![pave_spike_range_mode_wrcs](img/pave_spike_range_mode_wrcs.png)

This mode works the same as the Dive Toss mode of the WRCS, just that it will
use the pods computed slant range and target instead.

![wrcs_auto_release_procedure](img/wrcs_auto_release_procedure.png)

The TTG cue will move down and meet the T0 cue to indicate the time to release.

![ttg_moes_to_tt0](img/ttg_moes_to_tt0.png)

#### ROR

Release on range is mostly a backup mode. The pilot must select TGT FIND as
delivery mode, and ROR on the range indicator.

![pave_spike_weapon_sel_tgt_find](img/pave_spike_weapon_sel_tgt_find.png)
![pave_spike_range_mode_ror](img/pave_spike_range_mode_ror.png)

Weapons will be released automatically, as soon as the computed slant range is
less than the set desired release range. The range is configured on the range
indicator, by setting the mode to SET and rotating the knob below the display.

![pave_spike_ror_controls](img/pave_spike_ror_controls.png)

Best results are achieved during level flight.

![ror_auto_release_procedure](img/ror_auto_release_procedure.png)

#### Stow

After turning on the system, the pod can be unstowed by pressing the STOW push
button.

![stow_lamp](img/stow_lamp.png)

When unstowed, the pod moves according to the current selections and
automatically goes into the WIDE FOV.

In the stowed position, the camera is rotated upwards and a cover is moved in
front of it. This protects the camera from stones and other hazards during taxi,
takeoff or low level flight.

![pave_spike_stowed](img/pave_spike_stowed.png)

The stow-procedure takes about 5 seconds, with the light indicating the current
status.

Note that the stow-position is held electrically and can not be held without
power. Unpowered, the pod swings freely with force. Taking off without first
applying power to the pod, or flying with the pod being powered off, will cause
the pod to leave the stow position. Outside of the stow position, the system
will get damaged through hazards and whenever it is forcefully moved into its
gimbal limits. Damage will not only offset the boresight position, but also
affect other properties, such as movement speed and similar.

#### Cooling

The targeting pod has a cooling system installed in the rear section, which
automatically cools the pod by external airflow.

![pave_spike_cooling](img/pave_spike_cooling.png)

In general, the system is capable of keeping the pods temperature within limits
during all normal operation.

However, if the temperature gets out of control, the Overheat lamp will
illuminate.

![overheat_lamp](img/overheat_lamp.png)

In this case, make sure to turn off the pod immediately and give it some time to
cool down first. Ignoring the lamp will cause parts of the pod to melt, damaging
it irreparably.

A broken pod is generally indicated by the MALF lamp going on and the display
being all black.

![pave_spike_melted](img/pave_spike_melted.png)

To prolong use of the pod and prevent overheating, limit slow and low-level
flight, as well as continuous use of the laser. As a rule-of-thumb, do not use
the laser for longer than 15 minutes without allowing for cooling between uses.
Limit continued slow and low level flight while operating the pod to 30 minutes.
For extreme outside temperatures, adjust the limits accordingly.

#### BITs

The pod has 5 built-in tests, with BIT 1 being the actual mode used during
normal operation. They can be activated and switched through by clicking the BIT
button below the display. The GO/MALF lights show the result of the BIT:

- GO - test was successful
- MALF - test detected a failure

During normal operation, activated through BIT 1, neither of the lights are
illuminated.

#### BIT 0

All lights on the Target Designator Set Control illuminate with full brightness.
The pod does not need to be powered up for this test.

![pave_spike_self_test](img/pave_spike_self_test.png)

GO/MALF do not indicate test results in this mode.

#### BIT 1

The circuits are energized and monitored. If any voltage reading is abnormal,
MALF illuminates.

GO does not illuminate in this mode.

This is the standard operational mode. The pod can be used normally and the
system will continuously monitor the status.

#### BIT 2

The system simulates track functionality, simulating all inputs, altitude and
range data.

After about 15 seconds, the test is finished with either GO or MALF
illuminating.

For the test to be successful, the aircraft must not be moving, the pod must be
unstowed and INS must be integrated.

#### Bit 3

This tests the laser energy level. The pod moves to a special position where it
looks inside itself, such that the laser fires against a special sensor mounted
inside the pod.

The pod must be unstowed and a valid laser code must have been entered, as well
as the LASER READY button being pushed in. The nosegear guard is ignored during
the test, allowing the use of the laser on ground.

Once the pod has reached the test position, the WSO must press and hold the
Reject/Override button to start firing the laser. The laser stops firing when
the button is released.

![reject_override_button](img/reject_override_button.png)

When the laser fires, a 5 second test program starts, with the sensor measuring
the laser energy. After the 5 second test, either GO or MALF illuminate to
indicate whether the energy level was above the required minimum.

To pilot can assist in telling the WSO that the test position has been reached,
as indicated by the Azimuth-Elevation Indicator.

![pave_spike_bit_3_az_el](img/pave_spike_bit_3_az_el.png)

#### Bit 4

The system tests the ranging computation by feeding a simulated laser slant
range of 2100 ft (Â±200). The pilot can confirm this using the Range Indicator
readout.

![pave_spike_bit_4_range](img/pave_spike_bit_4_range.png)

After about 8 to 14 seconds, the test is finished and either GO or MALF is lit.

#### Upgrades

Based on crew feedback, the Pave Spike targeting pod received two major
upgrades, which are available as separate selectable weapon in DCS.

#### Smart-Track

TCTO 518, known as the Smart-Track upgrade, aims at removing the requirement to
press the Reject/Override button to force the laser measured slant range in
situations in which the computed slant range was usually too inaccurate.

![reject_override_button](img/reject_override_button.png)

With the upgrade, the system will automatically accept the laser slant range
whenever the pods elevation gimbal is above -7.5 degrees. I.e. in shallow
angles, for example during 12-VIS mode.

#### Fast-Track

The popular upgrade TCTO 519 overhauls the pods gimbal motors, increasing the
movement speed from 15 dps to 60 dps.

At this speed, the targeting pod is capable of tracking a target during low
altitude high speed flight, such as overflights at 1,000 ft with 500 knots.

#### Checklists

#### Turn On

- Ensure power to the aircraft (left main AC bus and main DC bus)
- Ensure corresponding CBs are not pulled (No. 4 CB Panel, WSO left wall)
- POWER ON Button (WSO, Target Designator Set Control) - confirm lamp lit
- BIT 1 - confirm MALF not lit
- Video Select Switch - ASQ-153 (WSO, main panel)
- DSCG Mode - TV (pilot or WSO)
- Unstow by pressing lit STOW button - wait 5 seconds and confirm lamp off
- Confirm DSCG on and displaying pod camera feed

## Defensive Systems

### AN/ALE-40 Countermeasures System

The AN/ALE-40 countermeasures dispenser set provides the capability of
dispensing RR-170 A/AL chaff cartridges or MJU-7/B infrared flare cartridges, or
a combination of both. The system is comprised of four chaff dispensers, or a
combination of two chaff dispensers and two flare dispensers located on the
inboard armament pylons; a programmer and flares select switch in the pilot
cockpit; a cockpit control unit (CCU) in the WSO cockpit; indicator lights
located in both front and rear cockpit; and a dispense button located both in
the pilot and the WSO cockpit. The circuit breaker for the ALE-40 is located on
the No.4 Circuit Breaker Panel above the aft left console in the WSO cockpit.

![cm_dispenser](img/cm_dispenser.png)

Available loadout combinations are: empty; 120x chaff; 15x Flares + 90x chaff;
30x flares + 60x chaffs; and 30x flares.

Dispensing of countermeasures can be initiated by either the pilot or the WSO
from either the front or the rear cockpit. The CCU will initiate the various
modes of operation. The programmer will generate the firing commands in
different combinations called bursts or salvos. A group of several bursts
constitutes a salvo. The pylon mounted dispensers will convert the firing
commands to individually sequenced firing signals. If the operation mode is set
to chaff, the dispensing will start in the left pylon dispenser and then
transfer the dispensing signals to the right pylon dispenser upon depletion of
stores in the left dispenser. If the operation mode is set to flare, dispensing
will start in the right pylon master dispenser and upon depletion of stores the
sequencer switch will transfer the dispensing signal to the left master
dispenser. Flares can also be jettisoned from their dispensers at a rate of 10
flares per second by activating the ripple switch located on the CCU.

#### AN/ALE-40 Cockpit Control Unit (CCU)

The Cockpit Control Unit (CCU) is installed on the left console of the rear
cockpit. It consists of a chaff and a flare mode rotary knob, two subtraction
counters, two indicator lights, a guarded ripple switch and a chaff/flare
dispenser button. The CCU issues dispense and mode signals through the
programmer.

#### Chaff Mode Knob

The chaff operating modes can be selected by turning the chaff mode knob from
the OFF position to either the SGL, MULT or PROG positions. With the flare
select switch in the NORMAL position and flaps and speed brakes retracted, the
switch positions function as follows:

OFF Chaff system not activated/ not operational. SGL A single burst command that
is sent to the chaff dispenser whenever either dispense button is pressed. MULT
One salvo of fire commands is sent to the dispenser through the programmer
whenever either dispense button is pressed. PROG A group of salvo fire commands
is sent to the dispenser through the programmer whenever either dispense button
is pressed.

#### Flare Mode Knob

The flare operating modes can be selected by turning the flare mode knob from
the OFF position to either the SGL or PROG positions. With the flare select
switch in the NORMAL position and flaps and speed brakes retracted, the switch
positions function as follows:

OFF Flare system not activated/ not operational. SGL A single burst command that
is sent to the flare dispenser whenever either dispense button is pressed. PROG
One salvo of fire commands is sent to the dispenser through the programmer
whenever either dispense button is pressed.

#### Chaff and Flare Counters

There are two subtraction counters, one for the chaff system and one for the
flare system. They indicate the quantity of remaining chaff and flare cartridge
dispensers independent of the mode switch position.

NOTE: When the slave dispenser is set to Chaff Double (CD), the chaff counter
should be set to half the number of total chaff cartridges loaded or the chaff
counter will show twice the number of chaff cartridge dispenses remaining.

#### Chaff and Flare Indicator Lights

Both the flare and the chaff system have one green indicator light each.
Whenever a mode is selected on the respective mode knob, the corresponding
indicator light will illuminate.

NOTE: Both flare and chaff modes can be operated simultaneously provided a mixed
chaff/flare loadout has been selected.

#### Ripple Switch

The ripple switch is guarded. When the guard is lifted and the switch is set to
ON, it will initiate flare dispensing regardless of the position of any other
switches or mode knobs in the countermeasures system- if the flaps and the speed
brakes are retracted. The flares will be dispensed at a rate of 10 flares per
second until both left and right pylon dispensers are empty.

#### Dispense Button (Rear Cockpit)

When pressing the dispense button chaff/flare dispensing is initiated as set on
the CCU and AN/ALE-40 programmer if the flaps and speed brakes are retracted,
and provided either or both the chaff/flare mode knobs are in any position other
than OFF.

#### AN/ALE-40 Programmer

The AN/ALE-40 Programmer contains the controls and circuitry used to send
specific fire commands to the chaff/flare dispensers. The following functions
are available:

Control Function

CHAFF BURST: Selects the quantity of chaff bursts per salvo COUNT 1, 2, 3, 4, 6,
8 (units) INTERVAL .1, .2, .3, .4 Selects the time interval between each chaff
burst (seconds) CHAFF SALVO: Selects the number of salvos COUNT 1, 2, 4, 8, C
(continuous) INTERVAL 1, 2, 3, 4, Selects the time interval in seconds between
each salvo 5, 8, R (random) FLARE BURST: Selects the quantity of flare bursts
COUNT 1, 2, 4, 8, C (continuous) INTERVAL 3, 4, 6, 8, Selects the time interval
between each flare burst 10 (seconds)

#### Flares Select Switch

If the flares select switch is in the NORMAL position, it arms the
countermeasures dispenser system and allows for chaffs and flares to be
dispensed as set by the CCU and the programmer by pressing either dispense
button.

If the flares select switch is in the FLARES position it only affects the front
cockpit dispense button by ignoring all switches and knobs in the
countermeasures system, provided that the flaps and speed brakes are retracted.
This allows the pilot to dispense a single flare each time he presses the
dispense button. Rear cockpit dispense functions are unaffected by the switch
position.

#### Flares Indicator Light (Amber)

The FLARES indicator light is amber. It illuminates when the flares select
switch is set to FLARES. When illuminated, flares can be dispensed by pressing
the front cockpit dispense button regardless of programmer and CCU switch and
knob positions, if the flaps and speed brakes are retracted.

#### AN/ALE-40 Power On Indicator Light (Green)

The AN/ALE-40 power on indicator light is green. It illuminates when the flares
select switch is set to NORMAL and either (or both) of the chaff and flare mod
knobs are in any position other than OFF.

#### Dispense Button (Front Cockpit)

When pressing the dispense button chaff/flare dispensing is initiated as set on
the CCU and AN/ALE-40 programmer if the flaps and speed brakes are retracted and
the flares select switch is set to NORMAL. Additionally single unit flare
dispensing can be initiated by a single button press if the flares select switch
is set to FLARES.

#### AN/ALE-40 Dispensers

The AN/ALE-40 countermeasures dispensers are divided into two distinct dispenser
configurations. The master (outboard) dispenser contains the electronics and
sequencer switch for both dispensers on each pylon and is installed on the
outboard side of the inboard armament pylons. The slave (inboard) dispenser is
installed on the inboard side of the inboard armament pylons and is connected to
the master dispenser by an interconnect cable. The aircraft can be configured
either with four chaff payload modules on all four dispensers or two chaff
payload modules on the slave dispensers and two flare payload modules on the
master dispensers. Only chaff payload modules can be installed on the slave
dispensers; flare payload modules can only be installed on the master
dispensers.

#### Master Dispenser Assembly

NOTE: Operation of the master dispenser assembly is done automatically by the
ground crew in DCS, according to the AN/ALE-40 loadout selected in the loadout
menu.

One master dispenser assembly is installed on the outboard side of each inboard
armament pylon. It consists of a sequencer switch, a breech assembly, a
RESET/OPERATE circuit breaker switch, a payload control switch, a safety pin
switch with safety pin and warning streamer and relevant electrical circuitry.
The sequencer switch converts the firing commands into individual firing signals
for each pyrotechnic squib in both the master and slave dispensers. The breech
assembly provides the interface to mount the chaff or flare payload modules.
Insertion of the safety pin removes electrical power to both pylon mounted
dispensers. After a full chaff or flare module has been loaded, the
RESET/OPERATE switch is placed in OPERATE. The chaff or flare sections will fire
in sequence. After flight, if a partial load of chaff or flares remains, the
switch should be left in OPERATE. If the switch is moved to RESET, the empty
chaff or flare stations have to be stepped through before loaded stations will
fire. The payload selector switch positions C (chaff) and F (flare) only define
the master dispenser mode of deployment and are set automatically in DCS
according to the selected loadout.

#### Slave Dispenser Assembly

Note: The payload selector switch position is set to CS (chaff single dispense)
by default in DCS. To set it to CD (chaff double dispense), you have to do so
either in the Mission Editor Unit Aircraft Additional Options tab or in the
kneeboard. This action can only be performed on the ground and/or before mission
start.

One slave dispenser assembly is installed on the inboard side of each inboard
armament pylon. It contains a payload selector switch to set either chaff single
or chaff double dispense, a breech assembly and relevant electrical circuitry.
If the payload selector switch is left in the default CS position, one chaff
cartridge will be dispensed for each chaff burst commanded. If the payload
selector switch is set to the CD position, two chaff cartridges will be
dispensed simultaneously, one from each dispenser, for each chaff burst
commanded. The breech assembly provides the interface to mount the chaff payload
module.

#### Flare Housing Adapter

The flare housing adapter is installed between the master dispenser assembly and
the flare payload module. The wedge shaped adapter ensures that the flares will
be ejected aft and down from the aircraft. It cannot be mounted to the slave
dispenser.

#### Chaff Payload Module and Cartridges

The chaff payload module is attached to the master or slave dispenser breech
assembly with four quick release fasteners. The chaff cartridge consists of a
basic plastic sleeve, chaff dipoles and a plastic end cap. When dispensed the
chaff dipoles are ejected from the sleeves and leave the disposable sleeve and
empty squib case behind. The cartridge base provides a recess for the chaff
pyrotechnic squib.

WARNING: Accidental discharge of the chaff cartridges can cause injury to
personnel or damage to the aircraft. The master dispenser safety pin must be
installed at all times when loading, unloading or maintaining the system.

#### Flare Payload Module and Cartridges

The flare payload module can only be installed on the master dispenser assembly.
The flare housing adapter serves as the interface. The flare cartridge consists
of a metal outer sleeve, a flare element, a safing and initiation device and a
plastic end cap. An indentation in the cartridge base allows for proper flare
installation.

WARNING: Accidental discharge of the flare cartridges can cause injury to
personnel or damage to the aircraft. The master dispenser safety pin must be
installed at all times when loading, unloading or maintaining the system.

#### Pyrotechnic Squibs

The chaff pyrotechnic squibs are installed immediately prior to use and are
stored separately from the chaff cartridges. They are metal encased and
electrically fired.

The flare pyrotechnic squibs are larger in diameter and have an O-ring groove.
They are installed immediately prior to use and are stored separately from the
flare cartridges.
